<i>The Religion of Nature Delineated</i> being a Book in great esteem with her late majesty Queen Caroline, she was pleased to command me to translate the Notes
into English for her own use: And there being a Demand for a new Edition, it was thought proper to publish this translation, as these Notes are illustrations and Confirmations of the Sentiments of the learned Author; and therefore I have consented to the publishing of them,

John Clarke.

Salisbury
17 April, 1750.

The Religion of Nature Delineated

To <abbr class="name">A.F.</abbr>, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>
<p>
I was much surprised, sir, when (fome time ago) you so importunately desired my thoughts upon these questions,
</p>
<ol>
<li>Is there really any such thing as <em>natural religion</em>, properly and truly so called?</li>
<li>If there is, what is it?</li>
<li>How may a man qualify himself, so as to be able to judge, for himself, of the other religions professed in the world, to settle his own opinions in disputable matters; and then to enjoy tranquility of mind, neither disturbing others, nor being disturbed at what passes among them?
</ol>
<p>
With what view you did this; Whether in expectation of some little degree of satisfaction; or merely to try my abilities; or (which I rather think) out of kindness to amuse me at a time, when I wanted something to divert melancholy reflections, I shall not venture to guess. I shall only say, that could I have foreseen in due time, that such a task was to be imposed upon me, I might have been better prepared for it. I might have marked what was suitable to my purpose in those books, which I have read, but shall scarce ever return to read any more: many more I might have read too, which, not wanting them for my own conviction, I have neglected, and now have neither leisure nor patience to peruse: I might have noted what the various occurrences and cases, that happen in life, suggested: and, in general, I might have placed more of my time on such parts of learning, as would have been directly serviceable to me the present occasion.
</p><p>
However, as I have not spent my days without thinking and reflecting seriously within myself upon the articles and duties of natural religion, and they are <em>my thoughts</em> which you require, I have attempted, by recollecting old meditations, and consulting a few scattered papers, in which I had formerly for my own use set down some of them (briefly, and almost solecistically), to give an answer to the two first of your questions, together: tho’ I must own, not without trouble in adjusting and compacting loose sentiments, filling up vacuities, and bringing the chaos into the shape of something like a system.
</p><p>
Notwithstanding what I have said, in a treatise of natural religion, a subject so beaten and exhausted in all its parts, by all degrees of writers, in which many notions will inevitably occur that are no one’s property, and so many things require to be proved, which can scarce be proved by any other but the old arguments (or not so well), you must not expect to find <em>much</em> that is new. Yet <em>something</em> perhaps you may. That, which is advanced in the following papers, concerning the nature of moral good and evil, and is the prevailing thought that runs through them all, I never met with anywhere. And even as to those matters, in which I have been prevented by others, and which perhaps may be common, you have them, not as I took them from anybody, but as they used to appear to me in my walks and solitudes. So that they are indeed <em>my thoughts</em>, such as have been <em>long mine</em>, which I send you; without any regard to what others have, or have not said: as I persuade myself you will easily perceive. It is not hard to discern, whether a work of this kind be all of a piece; and to distinguish the genuine hand of an author from the false wares and patch-work of a plagiary. Though after all, it would be madness in a man to go out of his right way, only because it has been frequented by others, or perhaps is the high road.
</p><p>
Sensible how unfinished this performance is, I call it only a delineation, or rude draft. Where I am defective, or trip, I hope you will excuse a friend, who has now passed the threshold of old age; and is, upon that and other accounts, not able to bear much study or application. And thus I commit to your candor what follows: which, for the sake of order and perspicuity, I have divided into sections, and propositions.
</p>
<h2 id="sect1">Section I. Of Moral Good and Evil.</h2>
<p>
The foundation of religion lies in that difference between the acts of men, which distinguishes them into good, evil, indifferent. For if there is such a difference, there must be religion; &amp; <i xml:lang="la">contra</i>. Upon this account it is that such a long and laborious inquiry has been made after some general idea<a>, or some rule<a>, by comparing the foresaid acts with which it might appear, to which kind they respectively belong<a>. And though men have not yet agreed upon any one, yet one certainly there must be<a>. That, which I am going to propose, has always seemed to me not only evidently true, but withal so obvious and plain, that perhaps for this very reason it has not merited the notice of authors: and the use and application of it is so easy, that if things are but fairly permitted to speak for themselves their own natural language, they will, with a moderate attention, be found <em>themselves</em> to proclaim their own rectitude or obliquity; that is, whether they are disagreeable to it, or not. I shall endeavor by degrees to explain my meaning.
</p><p id="prop1">
<b>I. That act, which may be denominated morally good or evil, must be the act of a being capable of distinguishing, choosing, and acting for himself</b>:<a> or more briefly, <b>of an intelligent and free agent</b>. (Because in proper speaking no act at all can be ascribed to that, which is not endowed with these capacities. For that, which cannot distinguish, cannot choose: and that, which has not the opportunity, or liberty of choosing for itself, and acting accordingly, from an internal principle, acts, if it acts at all, under a necessity incumbent <i xml:lang="la">ab extra</i>. But that, which acts thus, is in reality only <em>an instrument</em> in the hand of something which imposes the necessity; and can-not properly be said <em>to act</em>, but <em>to be acted</em>. The act must be the act of an agent: therefore not of his instrument.
</p><p>
A being under the above-mentioned inabilities is, as to the morality of its acts, in the state of inert and passive matter, and can be but a <em>machine</em>: to which no language or philosophy ever ascribed <i xml:lang="grc">ἤθη</i> or <i xml:lang="la">mores</i>.
</p><p>
<b>II. Those propositions are true, which express things as they are: or, truth is the conformity of those words or signs, by which things are expressed, to the things themselves.</b> Definition.
</p><p>
<b>III. A true proposition may he denied, or things may be denied to be what they are, by deeds, as well as by express words or another proposition.</b> It is certain there is a meaning in many acts and gestures. Everybody understands weeping,<a> laughing, shrugs, frowns, <abbr>etc.</abbr> these are a sort of universal language. Applications are many times made, and a kind of dialogue maintained only by casts of the eye and motions of the adjacent muscles.<a> And we read of feet, that speak;<a> of a philosopher, who answered an argument by only getting up and walking;<a> and of one, who pretended to express the same sentence as many ways by gesticulation, as even Cicero himself could by all his <i xml:lang="la">copia</i> of words and eloquence.<a> But these instances do not come up to my meaning. There are many acts of other kinds, such as constitute the character of a man’s conduct in life, which have <em>in nature</em>, and would be taken by any indifferent judge <em>to have a signification</em>, and <em>to imply some proposition</em>, as plainly to be understood as if it was declared in words: and therefore if what such acts declare to be, is not, they must contradict truth, as much as any false proposition or assertion can.
</p><p>
If a body of soldiers, seeing another body approach, should fire upon them, would not this action declare that they were enemies; and if they were not enemies, would not this military language declare what was false? No, perhaps it may be said; this can only be called a mistake, like that which happened to the Athenians in the attack of Epipolæ,<a> or to the Carthaginians in their last encampment against Agathocles in Africa.<a> Suppose then, instead of this firing, some officer to have <em>said</em> they were enemies, when indeed they were friends: would nor that sentence affirming them to be enemies be false, notwithstanding he who spoke it was mistaken? The truth or falsehood of this affirmation does not depend upon the affirmer’s knowledge or ignorance: because there is a certain sense affixed to the words, which must either agree or disagree to that, concerning which the affirmation is made. The thing is the very same still, if into the place of <em>words</em> be substituted <em>actions</em>. The salute here was in nature the salute of an enemy, but should have been the salute of a friend: therefore it implied a falsity. Any spectator would have understood this action as I do; for a declaration, that the other were enemies. Now what is to be understood, has a meaning: and what has a meaning, may be either true or false: which is as much as can be said of any verbal sentence.
</p><p>
When Popilius Lænas solicited to have Cicero proscribed, and that he might find him out and be his executioner,<a> would not his carriage have sufficiently signified to any one, who was ignorant of the case, that Tully either was some very bad man, and deserved capital punishment; or had some way grievously injured this man; or at least had not saved his life, nor had as much reason to expect his service and good offices upon occasion, as he ever had to expect Tully’s? And all these things being false, were not his behavior and actions expressive of that which was false, or contradictions to truth? It is certain he <em>acted as if</em> those things had been true, which were not true, and as if those had not been true which were true (in this consisted the fault of his ingratitude): and if he in words had <em>said</em> they were true or not true, he had done no more than <em>talk as if</em> they were so: why then should not to act as if they were true or not true, when they were otherwise, contradict truth as much as to say they were so, when they were not so?<a>
</p><p>
A pertinacious objector may perhaps still say, it is the business of soldiers to defend themselves and their country from enemies, and to annoy them as opportunity permits; and self-preservation requires all men not only barely to defend themselves against aggressors, but many times also to prosecute such, and only such, as are wicked and dangerous: therefore it is natural to conclude, that they are enemies against whom we see soldiers defending themselves, and those men wicked and dangerous, whom we see prosecuted with zeal and ardor. Not that those acts of defending and prosecuting speak or signify so much: but conjectures are raised upon the common sense, which mankind has of such proceedings. Answer: If it be natural to conclude anything from them, do they not naturally convey the notice of something to be concluded? And what is conveying the notice of anything but notifying or signifying that thing? And then again, if this signification is natural and founded in the <em>common</em> principles and sense of mankind, is not this more than to have a meaning which results only from the use of some <em>particular</em> place or country, as that of language does?
</p><p id="anchor1">
 If A should enter into a compact with B, by which he promises and engages never to do some certain thing, and after this he does that thing: in this case it must be granted, that his act interferes with his promise, and is contrary to it. Now it cannot interfere with his promise, but it must also interfere with the truth of that <em>proposition</em>, which says there was such a promise made, or that there is such a compact subsisting. If this proposition be true, “A made such a certain agreement with B,” it would be denied by this, “A never made any agreement with B.” Why? Because the truth of this latter is inconsistent with the agreement asserted in the former. The formality of the denial, or that, which makes it to be a denial, is this inconsistency. If then the behavior of A be inconsistent with the agreement mentioned in the former proposition, that proposition is as much denied by A’s behavior, as it can be by the latter, or any other proposition. Or thus, If one proposition imports or contains that which is contrary to what is contained in another, it is said to contradict this other, and denies the existence of what is contained in it. Just so if one act imports that which is contrary to the import of another, it contradicts this other, and denies its existence. In a word, if A by his actions denies the engagements, to which he has subjected himself, his actions deny them; just as we say, Ptolemy by his writings denies the motion of the earth, or his writings deny it.<a>
</p><p>
 When the question was asked, “Whose sheep are these?” the answer was, “Ægon’s: for he committed them to my care”<a> (he uses and disposes of them as his). By this act Damœtas understood them to be his; and if they had not been his, but Alphondas’s or Melibœus’s, Ægon, by an act very intelligible to Damœtas, had expressed what was not true. What is said here is the stronger, because he, who has the use and disposal of anything, has all that he can have of it; and, vice versa, he who has the all (or property) of anything, must have all the use and disposal of it. So that a man cannot more fully proclaim any thing to be his, than by using it, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> But of this something more hereafter.
</p><p>
In the Jewish history we read, that when Abimelech saw Isaac sporting<a> with Rebecca, and taking conjugal liberties,<a> he presently knew her to be Isaac’s wife; and if she had not been his wife, the case had been as in the preceding instance. If it be objected, that she might have been his mistress or a harlot; I answer, that so she might have been, though Isaac had told him by words that she was his wife. And it is sufficient for my purpose, and to make acts capable of contradicting truth, if they may be allowed <em>to express things as plainly and determinately as words can</em>. Certainly Abimelech gave greater credit to that information which passed through his eye, than to that which he received by the ear;<a> and to what Isaac did, than to what he said. For Isaac had told him, that she was not his wife, but his sister.<a>
</p><p>
A certain author<a> writes to this purpose, “If a soldier, who had taken the oath to Cæsar, should run over to the enemy, and serve him against Cæsar, and after that be taken; would he not be punished as a deserter, and a perjured villain? And if he should plead for himself, that he never denied Cæsar; would it not be answered, That with his tongue he did not deny him, but with his actions (or by facts) he did?” And in another place, “Let us, says he, suppose some tyrant command a Christian to burn incense to Jupiter, without adding anything of a verbal abnegation of Christ: if the Christian should do this, would it not be manifest to all, that by that by that very act he denied him;” (and I may add, consequently denied those propositions which affirm him to be the Christ, a teacher of true religion, and the like<a>)?
</p><p>
When a man lives, as if he had the estate which he has not, or was in other regards (all fairly cast up) what he is not, what judgment is to be passed upon him? Does not his whole conduct breathe untruth? May we not say (if the propriety of language permits), that he lives a lie?<a>
</p><p>
In common speech we say some actions are insignificant, which would not be sense, if there were not some that are significant, that have a tendency and meaning. And this is as much as can be said of articulate sounds, that they are either significant or insignificant.</a>
</p><p>
It may not be improperly observed by the way, that the significance here attributed to men’s acts, proceeds not always from nature, but sometimes from custom and agreement among people,<a> as that of words and sounds mostly does. Acts of the latter kind may in different times and places have different, or even contrary significations. The generality of Christians, when they pray, take off their hats: the Jews, when they pray<a> or say any of their Berakoth, put them on. The same thing which among Christians denotes reverence, imports irreverence among the Jews. The reason is, because covering the head with a hat (if it has no influence upon one’s health) is in itself an indifferent thing, and people by usage or consent may make it interpretable either way. Such acts seem to be adopted into their language, and may be reckoned part of it. But acts of the former kind, such as I chiefly here intend, have an unalterable signification, and can by no agreement or force ever be made to express the contrary to it. Ægon’s treating the flock, and disposing of it as if it was his, can by no torture be brought to signify that it was not his. From whence it appears, that facts express more strongly, even than words themselves;<a> or to contradict any proposition by facts is a fuller and more effectual contradiction, than can possibly be made by words only.<a> Words are but arbitrary signs<a> of our ideas, or indications of our thoughts (that word, which in one language denotes “poverty,”<a> in another denotes “riches”<a>): but <em>facts</em> may be taken as the effects of them, or rather as the <em>thoughts themselves produced into act</em>; as the very conceptions of the mind brought forth, and grown to maturity; and therefore as the most natural and express representations of them. And, beside this, they bear certain respects to things, which are not arbitrary, but as determinate and immutable as any ratio’s are in mathematics. For the facts and the things they respect are <em>just what they are</em>, as much as any two given quantities are; and therefore the respects interceding between those must be as fixed, as the ratio is which one of these bears to the other: that is, they must remain the same, and always speak the same language, till things cease to be what they are
</p><p>
I lay this down then as a fundamental maxim, <em>That whoever acts as if things were so, or not so, does by his acts declare, that they are so, or not so;</em> as plainly as he could by words, and with more reality. And if the things are otherwise, his acts contradict those propositions, which assert them to be as they are.<a>
</p><p id="prop4">
<b>IV. No act (whether word<a> or deed) of any being, to whom moral good and evil are imputable, that interferes with any true proposition, or denies any thing to be as it is, can be right.</b> For,
</p><p>
1. If that proposition, which is false, be wrong,<a> that act which <em>implies</em> such a proposition, or is founded in it, cannot be right: because it is the very proposition itself in practice.
</p><p>
2. Those propositions, which are true, and express things as they are, express the <em>relation</em> between the subject and the attribute as it is; that is, this is either affirmed or denied of that according to the nature of <em>that relation</em>. And further, this relation (or, if you will, the nature of this relation) is determined and fixed by the natures of the things themselves. Therefore nothing can interfere with any proposition that is true, but it must likewise interfere with nature (the nature of the relation, and the natures of the things themselves too), and consequently be <em>unnatural</em>, or <em>wrong in nature</em>. So very much are those gentlemen mistaken, who by <em>following nature</em> mean only complying with their bodily inclinations, though in opposition to truth, or at least without any regard to it. Truth is but a conformity to nature: and to follow nature cannot be to combat truth.<a>
</p><p>
3. If there is a supreme being, upon whom the existence of the world depends; and nothing can be in it but what He either causes, or permits to be; then to own things <em>to be as they are</em> is to own what He causes, or at least permits, <em>to be thus caused or permitted</em>: and this is to take things as He gives them, to go into His constitution of the world; and to submit to His will, revealed in the books of nature.<a> To do this therefore must be agreeable to His will. And if so, the contrary must be disagreeable to it; and, since (as we shall find in due time) there is a perfect rectitude in His will, certainly <em>wrong</em>.
</p><p>
I desire that I may not be misunderstood in respect to the actings of wicked men. I do not say, it is agreeable to the will of God, that what is <em>ill</em> done by them, should be <em>so</em> done, <abbr>i.e.</abbr> that they should use their liberty ill: but I say, when they have done this and committed some evil, it is agreeable to His will, that we should allow it to <em>have been</em> committed: or, it would be disagreeable to His will, that we should <em>deny</em> it to have been committed.
</p><p>
As the owning of things, in all our conduct, to be as they are, is direct obedience:<a> so the contrary, not to own things to be or to have been that are or have been, or not to be what they are, is direct rebellion against Him, who is the Author of nature. For it is as much as to say, “God indeed causes such a thing to be, or at least permits it, and it is; or the relation, that lies between this and that, is of such a nature, that one may be affirmed of the other, <abbr>etc.</abbr> this is true: but yet to me it shall not be so: I will not endure it, or act as if it were so: the laws of nature are ill-framed, nor will I mind them, or what follows from them: even existence shall be non-existence, when my pleasures require.” Such an impious declaration as this attends every voluntary infraction of truth.
</p><p>
4. Things cannot be denied to be what they are, in any instance or manner whatsoever, without contradicting axioms and truths eternal. For such are these: <em>everything is what it is</em>; <em>that which is done, cannot be undone</em>; and the like. And then if those truths be considered as having always subsisted in the Divine mind, to which they have always been true, and which differs not from the Deity himself, to do this is to act not only in opposition to His government or sovereignty, but to His nature<a> also: which, if He be perfect, and there be nothing in Him but what is most right, must also upon this account be most wrong.
</p><p>
Pardon these inadequate ways of speaking of God. You will apprehend my meaning: which perhaps may be better represented thus. If there are such things as axioms, which are and always have been immutably true, and consequently have been always known to God to be so,</a> the truth of them cannot be denied any way, either directly or indirectly, but the truth of the Divine knowledge must be denied too.
</p><p>
5. Designedly to treat things as being what they are not is the greatest possible absurdity. It is to put bitter for sweet, darkness for light, crooked for straight, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> It is to subvert all science, to renounce all sense of truth, and flatly to deny the existence of anything. For nothing can be true, nothing does exist, if things are not what they are.
</p><p>
To talk to a post, or otherwise treat it as if it was a man, would surely be reckoned an absurdity, if not distraction.<a> Why? because this is to treat it as being what it is not. And why should not the converse be reckoned as bad; that is, to treat a man as a post;<a> as if he had no sense, and felt not injuries, which he does feel; as if to him pain and sorrow were not pain; happiness not happiness. This is what the cruel and unjust often do.
</p><p>
Lastly, To deny things to be as they are is a transgression of the great law of our nature, the law of reason. For truth cannot be opposed, but reason must be violated. But of this more in the proper place.
</p><p>
Much might be added here concerning the amiable nature,<a> and great force<a> of truth. If I may judge by what I feel within myself, the least truth cannot be contradicted without much reluctance: even to see other men disregard it does something more than displease; it is <em>shocking</em>.
</p><p id="prop5">
<b>V. What has been said of acts inconsistent with truth, may also be said of many omissions, or neglects to act: that is, by these also true propositions may be denied to be true; and then those omissions, by which this is done, must be wrong for the same reasons with those assigned under the former proposition.</b>
</p><p>
Nothing can be asserted or denied by any act with regard to those things, to which it bears no relation: and here no truth can be affected. And when acts <em>do</em> bear such relations to other things, as to be declaratory of something concerning them, this commonly is visible; and it is not difficult to determine, whether truth suffers by them, or not. Some things cannot possibly be done, but truth must be directly and positively denied; and the thing will be clear. But the cases arising from omissions are not always so well determined, and plain: it is not always easy to know when or how far truth is violated by omitting. Here therefore more latitude must be allowed, and much must be left to every one’s own judgment and ingenuity.
</p><p>
This may be said in general, that when any truth would be denied by acting, the omitting to act can deny no truth. For no truth can be contrary to truth.<a> And there may be omissions in other cases, that are silent as to truth. But yet there are joint neglects or refusals to act, which are manifestly inconsistent with it (or, with some true propositions). We <a href="#anchor1">before</a> supposed A to have engaged not to do some certain thing, <abbr>etc.</abbr> if now, on the other side, he should by some solemn promise, oath, or other act undertake to do some certain thing before such a time, and he voluntarily<a> omits to do it, he would behave himself as if there had been no such promise or engagement; which is equal to denying there was any: and truth is as much contradicted in this as in the former instance.
</p><p>
Again, there are some ends, which the nature of things and truth require us to aim at, and at which therefore if we do not aim, nature and truth are denied. If a man does not desire to prevent evils, and to be happy, he denies both his own nature and the nature and definition of happiness to be what they are. And then further, willingly to neglect the <em>means</em>, leading to any such end, is the same as not to propose that end, and must fall under the same censure. As retreating from any end commonly attends the not advancing towards it, and that may be considered as an act, many omissions of this kind may be turned over to the other side,<a> and brought under the foregoing proposition.
</p><p>
It must be confessed there is a difficulty as to the means, by which we are to consult our own preservation and happiness: to know what those are, and what they are with respect to us. For our abilities and opportunities are not equal: some labor under disadvantages invincible: and our ignorance of the true natures of things, of their operations and effects in such an irregular distempered world, and of those many incidents, that may happen either to further or break our measures, deprive us of certainty in these matters. But still we may judge as well as we can, and do what we can;<a> and the neglect to do this will be an omission within the reach of the proposition.
</p><p>
There are omissions of other kinds, which will deserve to be annumerated to these by being either total, or notorious, or upon the score of some other circumstance. It is certain I should not deny the <i>Phœnissæ</i> of Euripides to be an excellent drama by not reading it: nor do I deny Chihil-menâr to be a rare piece of antiquity by nor going to see it. But should I, having leisure, health, and proper opportunities, read nothing, nor make any inquiries in order to improve my mind, and attain such knowledge as may be useful to me, I should then deny my mind to be what it is, and that knowledge to be what it is. And if it does not appear precisely, into what kind of studies this respect to truth will carry a man preferably to all others, how far it will oblige him to continue his pursuit after knowledge, and where the discontinuance begins to be no offence against truth, he must consult his own opportunities and genius, and judge for himself as well as he can.<a> This is one of those cases which I said before were not so well determined.
</p><p>
If I give nothing to this or that poor body, to whom I am under no particular obligation, I do not by this deny them to be poor, any more than I should deny a man to have a squalid beard by not shaving him, to be nasty by not washing him, or to be lame by not taking him on my back.
</p><p>
Many things are here to be taken into consideration (according to the next proposition): perhaps I might encroach upon truth by <em>doing</em> this; and then I cannot by <em>not doing</em> it.<a> But if I, being of ability to afford now and then something in charity to the poor, should yet never give them anything at all, I should then certainly deny the condition of the poor to be what it is, and my own to be what it is: and thus truth would be injured. So, again,
</p><p>
If I should not say my prayers at such a certain hour, or in such a certain place and manner, this would nor imply a denial of the existence of God, His providence, or my dependence upon Him: nay, there may be reasons perhaps against that particular time, place, manner. But if I should never pray to Him, or worship Him at all, such a total omission would be equivalent to this assertion, “There is no God, who governs the world, to be adored:” which, if there is such a being, must be contrary to truth. Also generally and notoriously to neglect this duty (permit me to call it so), though not quite always, will favor, if not directly proclaim the same untruth. For certainly to worship God after this manner is only to worship him accidentally, which is to declare it a great accident that he is worshipped at all, and this approaches as near as it is possible to a total neglect. Beside, such a sparing and infrequent worshipper of the Deity betrays such a habitual disregard of Him, as will render every religious act insignificant and null.
</p><p>
Should I, in the last place, find a man grievously hurt by some accident, fallen down, alone, and without present help like to perish; or see his house on fire, nobody being near to help, or call out: in this extremity if I do not give him my assistance immediately, I do not do it at all: and by this refusing to do it according to my ability, I deny his case to be what it is; human nature to be what it is; and even those desires and expectations, which I am conscious to myself I should have under the like misfortune, to be what they are.
</p><p id="prop6">
<b>VI. In order to judge rightly what anything is, it must be considered not only what it is in itself or in one respect, but also what it may be in any other respect, which is capable of being denied by facts or practice: and the whole defeription of the thing ought to be taken in.</b>
</p><p>
If a man steals a horse, and rides away upon him, he may be said indeed by riding him to use him as a <em>horse</em>, but not as <em>the horse of another man</em>, who gave him no licence to do this. He does not therefore consider him as being what he is, unless he takes in the respect he bears to his true owner. But it is not necessary perhaps to consider what he is in respect to his color, shape, or age: because the thief’s riding away with him may neither affirm nor deny him to be of any particular color, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> I say therefore, that those, and all those properties, respects, and circumstances, which may be contradicted by practice, are to be taken into consideration. For otherwise the thing to be considered is but imperfectly surveyed; and the whole compass of it being not taken in, it is taken not as being what it is, but as what it is <em>in part</em> only, and in other respects perhaps as being what it is not.
</p><p>
If a rich man being upon a journey, should be robbed and stripped, it would be a second robbery and injustice committed upon him to take from him part of his then character, and to consider him only as a rich man. His character completed is a <em>rich man robbed and abused</em>, and indeed at that time a poor man<a> and distressed, though able to repay afterwards the assistance lent him.
</p><p>
Moreover a man in giving assistance of any kind to another should consider what his own circumstances are, as well as what the other’s are.<a> If they do not permit him to give it, he does not by his forbearance deny the other to want it: but if he should give it, and by that deny his own or his family’s circumstances to be what they are, he would actually contradict truth. And since (as I have observed already) all truths are consistent, nor can anything be true any further than it is compatible with other things that are true; when both parties are placed in a right light, and the case properly stated for a judgment, the latter may indeed be truly said to want assistance, but not the assistance of the former: any more than a man, who wants a guide, may be said to want a blind or a lame guide. By putting things thus may be truly known what the latter is with respect to the former.
</p><p>
The case becomes more difficult, when a man (A) is under some promise or compact to assist another (B), and at the same time bound to consult his own happiness, provide for his family, <abbr>etc.</abbr> and he cannot do these, if he does that, effectually. For what must A do? Here are not indeed opposite <em>truths</em>, but there are truths on opposite <em>sides</em>. I answer: though there cannot be two incompatible duties, or though two inconsistent acts cannot be both A’s duty at the same time (for then his duty would be an impossibility); yet an obligation, which I will call mixed, may arise out of those differing considerations. A should assist B; but so, as not to neglect himself and family, <abbr>etc.</abbr> and so to take care of himself and family, as not to forget the other engagement, as well and honestly as he can. Here the importance of the truths on the one and the other side should be diligently compared: and there must in such cases be always some exception or limitation understood. It is not in man’s power to promise absolutely. He can only promise as one, who may be disabled by the weight and incumbency of truths not then existing.
</p><p>
I could here insert many instances of partial thinking, which occur in authors: but I shall choose only to set down one in the margin.<a>
</p><p>
In short, when things are truly estimated, persons concerned, times, places,<a> ends intended,<a> and effects that naturally follow, must be added to them.
</p><p>
<b>VII. When any act would be wrong, the forbearing that act must be right: likewise when the omission of anything would be wrong, the doing of it (<abbr>i.e.</abbr> not omitting it) must be right.</b> Because <i xml:lang="la">contrariorum contraria est ratio</i>.
</p><p>
<b>VIII. Moral good and evil are coincident with right and wrong.</b> For that cannot be good, which is wrong; nor that evil, which is right.
</p><p name="prop9">
<b>IX. Every act therefore of such a being, as is before described, and all those omissions which interfere with truth (<abbr>i.e.</abbr> deny any proposition to be true; which is true; or suppose anything not to be what it is, in any regard)<a> are morally evil, in some degree or other: the forbearing such acts, and the acting in opposition to such omissions are morally good: and when anything may be either done, or not done, equally without the violation of truth, that thing is indifferent.</b>
</p><p>
I would have it to be minded well, that when I speak of acts inconsistent with truth, I mean any truth; any true proposition whatsoever, whether containing matter of speculation, or plain fact. I would have everything taken to be what in fat and truth it is.<a>
</p><p>
It may be of use also to remember, that I have added those words <em>in some degree or other</em>. For neither all evil, nor all good actions are equal.<a> Those truths which they respect, though they are equally true, may comprise matters of very different importance;<a> or more truths may be violated one way than another:<a> and then the crimes committed by the violation of them may be equally (one as well as the other) said to be crimes, but not equal crimes.<a> If A steals a book from B which was pleasing and useful to him, it is true A is guilty of a crime in not treating the book as being what it is, the book of B, who is the proprietor of it, and one whose happiness partly depends upon it: but still if A should deprive B of a good estate, of which he was the true owner, he would be guilty of a much greater crime. For if we suppose the book to be worth to him one pound, and the estate £10,000, that truth, which is violated by depriving B of his book, is in effect violated 10,000 times by robbing him of his estate. It is the same as to repeat the theft of one pound 10,000 times over: and therefore if 10,000 thefts (or crimes) are more, and all together greater than one, one equal to 10,000 must be greater too: greater than that, which is but the 10,000th part of it, sure. Then, though the convenience and innocent pleasure, that B found in the use of the book, was a degree of happiness: yet the happiness accruing to him from the estate, by which he was supplied not only with necessaries, but also with many other comforts and harmless enjoyments, vastly exceeded it. And therefore the truth violated in the former case was, “B had a property in that, which gave him such a degree of happiness:” that violated in the latter, “B had a property in that, which gave him a happiness vastly superior to the other.” The violation therefore in the latter case is upon this account a vastly greater violation than in the former. Lastly, the, truths violated in the former case might end in B, those in the latter may perhaps be repeated in them of his family, who subsist also by the estate, and are to be provided for out of it. And these truths are very many in respect of every one of them, and all their descendents. Thus the degrees of evil or guilt are as the importance and number of truth violated.<a> I shall only add, on the other side, that the value of good actions will rise at least in proportion to the degrees of evil in the omission of them: and that therefore they cannot be equal, any more than the opposite evil omissions.
</p><p>
But let us return to that, which is our main subject, the distinction between moral good and evil. Some have been so wild as to deny there is any such thing: but from what has been said here, it is manifest, that there is as certainly moral good and evil as there is true and false; and that there is as natural and immutable a difference between those as between these, the difference at the bottom being indeed the same.<a> Others acknowledge, that there is indeed moral good and evil; but they want some criterion, or mark, by the help of which they might know them apart. And others there are, who pretend to have found that rule, by which our actions ought to be squared, and may be discriminated; or that ultimate end, to which they ought all to be referred:<a> but what they have advanced is either false, or not sufficiently guarded, or not comprehensive enough, or not clear and firm,<a> or (so far as it is just) reducible to <em>my</em> rule. For
</p><p>
They, who reckon nothing to be good but what they call <i xml:lang="la">honestum</i>,<a> may denominate actions according as that is, or is not the cause<a> or end<a> of them: but then what is <i xml:lang="la">honestum</i>?<a> Something is still wanting to measure things by, and to separate the <i xml:lang="la">honesta</i> from the <i xml:lang="la">inhonesta</i>.
</p><p>
They who place all in following nature,<a> they mean by that phrase acting according to the natures of things (that is, treating things as being what they in nature are, or according to truth) say what is right. But this does not seem to be their meaning. And if it is only that a man must follow his own nature,<a> since his nature is not purely rational, but there is a part of him, which he has in common with brutes, they appoint him a guide which I fear will mislead him, this being commonly more likely to prevail, than the rational part. At best this talk is loose.
</p><p>
They who make <em>right reason</em><a> to be the law, by which our acts are to be judged, and according to their conformity to this or deflection from it call them lawful or unlawful, good or bad, say something more particular and precise. And indeed it is true, that whatever will bear to be tried by right reason, is right; and that which is condemned by it, wrong. And moreover, if by right reason is meant that which is found by the right use of our rational faculties, this is the same with truth: and what is said by them, will be comprehended in what I have said. But the manner in which they have delivered themselves, is not yet explicit <em>enough</em>.</a> It leaves room for so many disputes and opposite right-reasons, that nothing can be settled, while every one pretends that <em>his</em> reason is right. And beside, what I have said, extends farther: for we are not only to respect those truths, which we discover by reasoning, but even such matiers of fact, as are fairly discovered to us by our senses. We ought to regard things as being what they are, which way soever we come to the knowledge of them.
</p><p>
They, who contenting themselves with superficial and transient views, deduce the difference between good and evil from the <em>common sense</em> of mankind,<a> and certain <em>principles</em><a> that are born with us,<a> put the matter upon a very infirm foot. For it is much to be suspected there are no such innate maxims as they pretend, but that the impressions of education are mistaken for them: and beside that, the sentiments of mankind are not uniform and constant, as that we may safely trust such an important distinction upon them.<a>
</p><p>
They, who own nothing to be good but <em>pleasure</em>, or what they call <i xml:lang="la">jucundum</i>, nothing evil but pain,<a> and distinguish things by their tendencies to this or that,<a> do not agree in what this pleasure is to be placed,<a> or by what methods and actings the most of it may be obtained. These are left to be questions still. As men have different tastes, different degrees of sense and philosophy, the same thing cannot be pleasant to all: and if particular actions are to be proved by this test, the morality of them will be very uncertain; the same act may be of one nature to one man, and of another to another. Beside, unless there be some strong limitation added as a fence for virtue, men will be apt to sink into gross voluptuousness, as in fact the generality of Epicurus’s herd have done<a> (notwithstanding all his talk of temperance, virtue, tranquility of mind, <abbr>etc.</abbr>); and the bridle will be usurped by those appetites which it is a principal part of all religion, natural as well as any other, to curb and restrain. So these men say what is intelligible indeed: but what they say is false. For not all pleasures, but only such pleasure as is <em>true</em>, or happiness (of which afterwards), may be reckoned among the <i xml:lang="la">fines</i>, or <i xml:lang="la">ultima bonorum</i>.
</p><p>
He,<a> who, having considered the two extremes in men’s practice, in condemning both which the world generally agrees, places virtue in the <em>middle</em>, and seems to raise an idea of it from its situation at an equal distance from the opposite extremes,<a> could only design to be understood of such virtues, as have extremes. It must be granted indeed, that whatever declines in any degree toward either extreme, must be so far wrong or evil; and therefore that, which equally (or nearly) divides the distance, and declines neither way, must be right: also, that his notion supplies us with a good direction for common use in many cases. But then there are several obligations, that can by no means be derived from it: scarce more than such, as respect the virtues couched under the word moderation. And even as to these, it is many times difficult to discern, which is the middle point.<a> This the author himself was sensible of.</a>
</p><p>
And when his master Plato makes virtue to consist in such a likeness to God,<a> as we are capable of (and God to be the great exemplar), he says what I shall not dispute. But since he tells us not how or by what means we may attain this likeness, we are little the wiser in point of practice: unless by it we understand the practice of truth, God being truth, and doing nothing contrary to it.<a>
</p><p>
Whether any of those other foundations, upon which morality has been built, will hold better than these mentioned, I much question. But if the formal ratio of moral good and evil be made to consist in a conformity of men’s acts to the truth of the case or the contrary, as I have here explained it, the distinction seems to be settled in a manner undeniable, intelligible, practicable. For as what is meant by <em>a true proposition</em> and <em>matter of fact</em> is perfectly understood by everybody; so will it be easy for any one, so far as he knows any such propositions and facts, to compare not only words, but also actions with them. A very little skill and attention will serve to interpret even these, and discover whether they speak truth, or not.<a>
</p><p>
<b>X. If there be moral good and evil, distinguished as before, there is religion; and such as may most properly be styled natural.</b> By religion I mean nothing else but an obligation to do (under which word I comprehend acts both of body and mind. I say, <em>to do</em>) what ought not to be omitted, and to forbear what ought not to be done. So that there must be religion, if there are things, of which some ought not to be done, some not to be omitted. But that there are such, appears from what has been said concerning moral good and evil: because that, which to omit would be evil, and which therefore being done would be good or well done, ought certainly by the terms to be done; and so that, which being done would be evil, and implies such absurdities and rebellion against the supreme being, as are mentioned under <a href="#prop4">proposition the IVth</a> ought most undoubtedly not to be done. And then since there is religion, which follows from the distinction between moral good and evil; since this distinction is founded in the respect, which men’s acts bear to truth; and since no proposition can be true, which expresses things otherwise than as they are in nature: since things are so, there must be religion, which is founded in nature, and may upon that account be most properly and truly called the religion of nature or natural religion; the great law of which religion, the law of nature, or rather (as we shall afterwards find reason to call it) of the Author of nature is,
</p><p>
<b>XI. That every intelligent, active, and free being should so behave himself, as by no act to contradict truth; or, that he should treat everything as being what it is.</b></a>
</p><p>
Objections I am sensible may be made to almost anything;<a> but I believe none to what has been here advanced but such as may be answered. For to consider a thing as being something else than what it is, or (which is the same) not to consider it as being what it is, is an absurdity indefensible. However, for a specimen, I will set down a few. Let us suppose some gentleman, who has not sufficiently considered these matters, amidst his freedoms, and in the gaiety of humor, to talk after some such manner as this. “If everything must be treated as being what it is, what rare work will follow? For, 1. To treat my enemy as such is to kill him, or revenge myself soundly upon him. 2. To use a creditor, who is a spendthrift, or one that knows not the use of money, or has no occasion for it, as such, is not to pay him. Nay further, 3. If I want money, don’t I act according to truth, if I take it from somebody else to supply my own wants? And more, do not I act contrary to truth, if I do not? 4. If one, who plainly appears to have a design of killing another, or doing him some great mischief, if he can find him, should ask me where he is, and I know where he is; may not I, to save life, say I do not know, though that be false? 5. At this rate I may not, in a frolic, break a glass, or burn a book: because forsooth to use these things as being what they are, is to drink out of the one, not to break it; and to read the other, not burn it. <a id="truth">Lastly, how shall a man know what is true: and if he can find out truth, may he not want the power of acting agreeably to it?</a>”
</p><p>
To the first objection it is easy to reply from what has been already said. For if the objector’s enemy, whom we will call E, was nothing more than his enemy, there might be some force in the objection; but since he may be considered as something else beside that, he must be used according to what he is in other respects, as well as in that from which he is denominated the objector’s (or O’s) enemy. For E in the first place is a man; and as such may claim the benefit of common humanity, whatever that is: and if O denies it to him, he wounds truth in a very sensible part. And then if O and E are fellow-citizens, living under the same government, and subject to laws, which are so many common covenants, limiting the behavior of one man to another, and by which E is exempt from all private violence in his body, estate, <abbr>etc.</abbr> O cannot treat E as being what he is, unless he treats him also as one, who by common consent is under such a protection. If he does otherwise, he denies the existence of the foresaid laws and public compacts: contrary to truth. And beside, O should act with respect to <em>himself</em> as being what he is; a man himself, in such or such circumstances, and one who has given up all right to private revenge (for that is the thing meant here). If truth therefore be observed, the result will be this. O must treat E as <em>something compounded</em> of a man, a fellow-citizen, and an enemy, all three: that is, he must only prosecute him in such a way, as is agreeable to the statutes and methods, which the society have obliged themselves to observe. And even as to legal prosecutions, there may be many things still to be considered. For E may show himself an enemy to O in things, that fall under the cognizance of law, which yet may be of moment and importance to him, or not. If they are such things, as really affect the safety or happiness of O or his family, then he will find himself obliged, in duty and submission to truth, to take refuge in the laws; and to punish E, or obtain satisfaction, and at least security for the future, by the means there prescribed. Because if he does not, he denies the nature and sense of happiness to be what they are; the obligations, which perhaps we shall show hereafter he, is under to his family,<a> to be what they are; a dangerous and wicked enemy to be dangerous and wicked; the end of laws, and society itself, to be the safety and good of its members, by preventing injuries, punishing offenders, <abbr>etc.</abbr> which it will appear to be, when that matter comes before us. But if the enmity of E rises not beyond trifling, or more tolerable instances, then O might act against truth, if he should be at more charge or hazard in prosecuting E than he can afford, or the thing lost or in danger is worth; should treat one that is an enemy in little things, or a little enemy, as a great one, or should deny to make some allowances, and forgive such peccadillos, as the common frailty of human nature makes it necessary for us mutually to forgive, if we will live together. Lastly, in cases, of which the laws of the place take no notice, truth and nature would be sufficiently observed, if O should keep a vigilant eye upon the steps of his adversary, and take the most prudent measures, that are compatible with the character of a private person, either to assuage the malice of E, or prevent the effects of it; or perhaps, if he should only not use him as a friend.<a> For this if he should do, notwithstanding the rants of some men, he would cancel the natural differences of things, and confound truth with untruth.
</p><p>
The debtor in the second objection, if he acts as he says there, does, in the first place, make himself the judge of his creditor, which is what he is not. For he lays him under a heavy sentence, an incapacity in effect of having any estate, or any more estate. In the next place, he arrogates to himself more than can be true: that he perfectly knows, not only what his creditor and his circumstances are, but also what they ever will be hereafter. He that is now weak, or extravagant, or very rich, may for ought he knows become otherwise. And, which is to be considered above all, he directly denies the money, which is the creditor’s, to be the creditor’s. For it is supposed to be owing or due to him (otherwise he is no creditor): and if it be due to him, he has a right to it: and if he has a right to it, <em>of right</em> it is his (or, it is <em>his</em>). But the debtor by detaining it uses it, as if it was his own, and therefore not the other’s; contrary to truth. To pay a man what is due to him does not deny, that he who pays may think him extravagant, <abbr>etc.</abbr> or any other truth; that act has no such signification. It only signifies, that he who pays thinks it due to the other, or that it is his: and <em>this</em> it naturally does signify. For he might pay the creditor without having any other thought relating to him, but would not without this.
</p><p>
Answer to objection the 3rd: Acting according to truth, as that phrase is used in the objection, is not the thing required by my rule; but, so to act that <em>no truth</em> may be <em>denied</em> by any act. Not taking from another man his money by violence is a forbearance, which does not signify, that I do not want money, or which denies any truth. But taking it denies that to be his, which (by the supposition) is his. The former is only as it were silence, which denies nothing: the latter a direct and loud assertion of a falsity; the former what can contradict no truth, because the latter does. If a man wants money through his own extravagance and vice, there can be no pretence for making another man to pay for his wickedness or folly. We will suppose therefore the man, who wants money, to want it for necessaries, and to have incurred this want through some misfortune, which he could not prevent. In this case, which is put as strong as can be for the objector, there are ways of expressing this want, or acting according to it, without trespassing upon truth. The man may by honest labor and industry seek to supply his wants; or he may apply as a supplicant,<a> not as an enemy or robber, to such as can afford to relieve him; or if his want is very pressing, to the first persons he meets, whom truth will oblige to assist him according to their abilities: or he may do <em>anything but</em> violate truth;</a> which is a privilege of a vast scope, and leaves him many resources. And such a behavior as this is not only agreeable to his case, and expressive of it in a way that is natural; but he would deny it to be what it is, if he did not act thus. If there is no way in the world, by which he may help himself without the violation of truth (which can scarce be supposed. If there is no other way) he must even take it as his fate.<a> Truth will be truth, and must retain its character and force, let his case be what it will. Many things might be added. The man, from whom this money is to be taken, will be proved <a>(<abbr>sect.</abbr> VI)</a> to have a right to defend himself and his, and not suffer it to be taken from him; perhaps he may stand as much in need of it, as the other, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>
</p><p>
Answer to objection the 4th: It is certain, in the first place, that nothing may willingly be done, which in any manner promotes murder: whoever is accessory to that, offends against many truths of great weight. 2. You are not obliged to answer the <i xml:lang="it">furioso</i>’s question. Silence here would contradict no truth. 3. No one can tell, in strict speaking, where another is, if he is not within his view. Therefore, you may <em>truly</em> deny, that you know where the man is. Lastly, if by not discovering him you should endanger your life (and this is the hardest circumstance, that can be taken into the objection), the case then would be the same, as if the inquirer should say, “If you do not murder such a one, I will murder you.” And then be sure you must not commit murder; but must defend yourself against this, as against other dangers, against Banditti, <abbr>etc.</abbr> as well as you can. Though merely to deny truth by words (I mean, when they are not productive of facts to follow; as in judicial transactions, bearing witness, or passing sentence) is not equal to a denial by facts; though an abuse of language is allowable in this case, if ever in any; though all sins against truth are not equal, and certainly a little trespassing upon it in the present case, for the good of all parties,<a> as little a one as any; and though one might look on a man in such a fit of rage as mad, and therefore talk to him not as a man but a madman: yet truth is sacred,<a> and there are other ways of coming off with innocence, by giving timely notice to the man in danger, calling in assistance, or taking the advantage of some seasonable incident.<a>
</p><p>
The 5th objection seems to respect inanimate things, which if we must treat according to what they are, it is insinuated we shall become obnoxious to many trifling obligations; such as are there mentioned. To this I answer thus: If the glass be nothing else but an useful drinking-glass, and these words fully express what it is, to treat it accordingly is indeed to drink out of it, when there is occasion and it is truly useful, and to break it designedly is to do what is wrong.<a> For that is to handle it, as if it neither was useful to the objector himself, nor could be so to any one else; contrary to the description of it. But if there be any reason for breaking the glass, then something is wanting to declare fully what it is. As, if the glass be poisoned: for then it becomes a poisoned drinking-glass, and to break or destroy it is to use it according to this true description of it. Or if by breaking it anything is to be obtained, which more than countervails the loss of it, it becomes a glass with that circumstance: and then for the objector to break it, if it be his own, is to use it according to what it is.  And if it should become by some circumstance useless only, though there should be no reason for breaking it, yet if there be none against it, the thing will be indifferent and matter of liberty. This answer, <i xml:lang="la">mutatis mutandis</i>, may be adapted to other things of this kind, books, or any thing else. As the usefulness or excellence of some books renders them worthy of immortality, and of all our care to secure them to posterity;<a> so some may be used more like what they are, by tearing or burning them, than by preserving or reading them: the number of which, large enough already, I wish you may not think to be increased by this, which I here send you.
</p><p>
Here two things ought to be regarded. 1. That though to act against truth in any case is wrong, yet, the degrees of guilt varying with the importance of things, in some cases the importance one way or the other may be so little as to render the crime evanescent or almost nothing.<a> And, 2. that inanimate beings cannot be considered as capable of wrong treatment, if the respect they bear to living beings is separated from them. The drinking-glass before-mentioned could not be considered as such, or be what it now is, if there was no drinking animal to own and use it. Nothing can be of any importance to that thing itself, which is void of all life and perception. So that when we compute what such things are, we must take them as being what they are in reference to things that have life.
</p><p>
The last: and most material objection, or question rather, shall be answered by and by. In the meantime I shall only say, that if in any particular case truth is inaccessible, and after due inquiry it does not appear what, or how things are, then this will be true, that the case or thing under consideration is doubtful: and to act agreeably unto this truth is to be not opinionative, nor obstinate, but modest, cautious, docile, and to endeavor to be on the safer side. Such behavior shows the case to be as it is. And as to the want of power to act agreeably to truth, that cannot be known till trials are made: and if anyone does try, and do his endeavor, he may take to himself the satisfaction, which he will find in <a>sect. IV</a>.
</p>
<h2>Section II. Of Happiness.</h2>
<p>
That, which demands to be next considered, is happiness; as being in itself most considerable; as abetting the cause of truth; and as being indeed so nearly allied to it, that they cannot well be parted. We cannot pay the respects due to one, unless we regard the other. Happiness must not be denied to be what it is: and it is by the practice of truth that we aim at that happiness, which is true.
</p><p>
In the few following propositions I shall not only give you my idea of it, but also subjoin some observation, which though perhaps not necessary here, we may sometime hereafter think no loss of time or labor to have made <i xml:lang="fr">en passant</i>: such as men of science would call, some of them <i xml:lang="la">porismata</i>, or corollaries, and same <i xml:lang="la">scholia</i>, I shall take them as they fall in my way promiscuously.
</p><p id="IIprop1">
<b>I. Pleasure is a consciousness of something agreeable, pain of the contrary: &amp; vice versa the consciousness of anything agreeable is pleasure, of the contrary pain.</b> For as nothing, that is agreeable to us, can be painful at the same time, and as such; nor anything disagreeable pleasant, by the terms; so neither can anything agreeable be for that reason (because it is agreeable) not pleasant, nor anything disagreeable not painful, in some measure or other.
</p><p>
Observation 1. Pleasures and pains are proportionable to the perceptions and sense of their subjects, or the persons affected with them. For consciousness and perception cannot be separated: because as I do not perceive what I am not conscious to myself I do perceive, so neither can I be conscious of what I do not perceive, or of more or less than what I do perceive. And therefore, since the degrees of pleasure or pain must be answerable to the consciousness, which the party affected has of them, they must likewise be as the degrees of perception are.
</p><p>
Observation 2. Whatever increases the power of perceiving, renders the percipient more susceptive of pleasure or pain. This is an immediate consequence; and to add more is needless: unless, that among the means, by which perceptions and the inward sense of things may in many cases be heightend and increased, the principal are reflection, and the practice of thinking. As I cannot be conscious of what I do not perceive: so I do not perceive that, which I do not advert upon. That which makes me feel, makes me advert. Every instance therefore of consciousness and perception is attended with an act of advertence: and as the more the perceptions are, the more are the advertences or reflections; so, vice versa, the more frequent or intense the acts of advertence and reflection are, the more consciousness there is, and the stronger is the perception. Further, all perceptions are produced in time: time passes by moments: there can be but one moment present at once: and therefore all present perception considered without any relation to what is past, or future, may be looked upon as momentaneous only. In this kind of perception the percipient perceives, as if he had not perceived anything before, nor had anything perceptible to follow. But in reflection there is a repetition of what is past, and an anticipation of that which is apprehended as yet to come: there is a connection of past and future, which by this are brought into the sum, and superadded to the present or momentaneous perceptions. Again, by reflecting we practice our capacity of apprehending: and this practising will increase, and as it were extend that capacity, to a certain degree. Lastly, reflection does not only accumulate moments past and future to those that are present, but even in their passage it seems to multiply them. For time, as well as space, is capable of indeterminate division: and the finer or nicer the advertence or reflection is, into the more parts is the time divided; which, while the mind considers those parts as so many several moments, is in effect rendered by this so much the longer. And to this experience agrees.
</p><p>
Observation 3. The causes of pleasure and pain are relative things: and in order to estimate truly their effect upon any particular subject they ought to be drawn into the degrees of perception in that subject. When the cause is of the same kind, and acts with an equal force, if the perception of one person be equal to that of another, what they perceive must needs be equal. And so it will be likewise, when the forces in the producing causes and the degrees of perception in the sentients are reciprocal. For (which does not seem to be considered by the world, and therefore ought the more particularly to be noted) if the cause of pleasure or pain should act but half as much upon A, as it does upon B; yet if the perceptivity of A be double to that of B, the sum of their pleasures or pains will be equal. In other cases they will be unequal. As, if the <i xml:lang="la">causa dolorifica</i> should act with the same impetus on C with which it acts upon D; yet if C had only two degrees of perception, and D had three, the pain sustained by D would be half as much more as that of C: because he would perceive or feel the acts and impressions of the cause more by so much. If it should act with twice the force upon D which it acts with upon C, then the pain of C would be to that of D as 2 to 6: <abbr>i.e.</abbr> as one degree of force multiplied by two degrees of perception to two degrees of force multiplied by three of perception. And so on.
</p><p>
Observation 4. Men’s respective happinesses or pleasures ought to be valued as they are to the <em>persons themselves</em>, whose they are; or according to the thoughts and sense, which <em>they</em> have of them: not according to the estimate put upon them by other people, who have no authority to judge of them, nor can know what they are; may compute by different rules; have less sense; be in different circumstances;<a> or such as guilt has rendered partial to themselves. If that prince, who having plenty and flocks many, yet ravished the poor man’s single ewe-lamb out of his bosom, reckoned the poor man’s loss to be not greater, than the loss of one of his lambs would have been to him, he must be very defective in moral arithmetic, and little understood the doctrine of proportion. Every man’s happiness is <em>his</em> happiness, what it is to him; and the loss of it is answerable to the degrees of his perception, to his manner of taking things, to his wants and circumstances.</a>
</p><p>
Observation 5. How judicious and wary ought princes, lawgivers, judges, juries, and even masters to be! They ought not to consider so much what a stout, refolute, obstinate, hardened criminal may bear, as what the weaker sort, or at least (if that can be known) the persons immediately concerned can bear: that is, what any punishment would be to them. For it is certain, all criminals are not of the former kind; and therefore should nor be used as if, they were. Some are drawn into crimes, which may render them obnoxious to public justice, they scarce know how themselves: some fall into them through necessity, strength of temptation, despair, elasticity of spirits and a sudden eruption of passion, ignorance of laws, want of good education, or some natural infirmity or propension, and some who are really innocent, are oppressed by the iniquity or mistakes of judges, witnesses, juries, or perhaps by the power and zeal of a faction, with which their sense or their honesty has not permitted them to join. What a difference must there be between the sufferings of a poor wretch sensible of his crime or misfortune, who would give a world for his deliverance, if he had it, and those of a sturdy veteran in roguery: between the apprehensions, tears, faintings of the one, and the brandy and oaths of the other; in short, between a tender nature and a brickbat!
</p><p>
Observation 6. In general, all persons ought to be very careful and tender, where any other is concerned. Otherwise they may do they know not what. For no man can tell, by himself, or any other way, how another may be affected.
</p><p>
Observation 7. There cannot he an equal distribution of rewards and punishments by any stated human laws.<a> Because (among other reasons) the same thing is rarely either the same gratification, or the same punishment to different persons.
</p><p>
Observation 8. The sufferings of brutes are not like the sufferings of men.<a> They perceive by moments, without reflection upon past or future, upon causes, circumstances, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>
</p><p>
Time and life without thinking are next neighbors to <em>nothing</em>, to no-time and no-life.<a> And therefore to kill a brute is to deprive him of a life, or a remainder of time, that is equal to little more than nothing: though this may perhaps be more applicable to some animals than to others. That, which is chiefly to be taken care of in this matter, is, that the brute may not be killed unnecessarily; when it is killed, that it may have as few moments of pain as may be;<a> and that no young be left to languish. So much by the way here.
</p><p id="prop2">
<b>II. Pain considered in itself is a real evil, pleasure a real good.</b> I take this as a <i xml:lang="la">postulatum</i>, that will without difficulty be granted. Therefore,
</p><p id="prop3">
<b>III. By the general idea of good and evil the one [pleasure] is in itself desirable, the other [pain] to be avoided.</b> What is here said, respects mere pleasure and pain, abstracted from all circumstances, consequences, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> But because there are some of these generally adhering to them, and such as enter so deep into their nature, that unless these be taken in, the full and true character of the other cannot be had, nor can it therefore be known what happiness is, I must: proceed to some other propositions relating to this subject.
</p><p>
<b>IV. Pleasure compared with pain may either be equal, or more, or less: also pleasure: may be compared with other pleasures,<a> and pains with pains.</b> Because all the moments of the pleasure must bear some respect or be in some ratio to all the moments of pain: as also all the degrees of one to all the degrees of the other: and so must those of one pleasure, or one pain, be to those of another. And if the degrees of intenseness be multiplied by the moments of duration, there must still be some ratio of the one product to the other.
</p><p>
That this proposition is true, appears from the general conduct of mankind; though in some particulars they may err, and wrong themselves, some more, some less. For what does all this hurry of business, what do all the labors and travels of men tend to, but to gain such advantages, as they think do exceed all their trouble? What are all their abstinences and self—denials for, if they do not think some pleasures less than the pain, that would succeed them? Do not the various methods of life show, that men prefer one sort of pleasure to another, and submit to one sort of pain rather than to have another? And within ourselves we cannot but find an indifference as to many things, not caring, whether we have the pain with the pleasure obtained by it, or miss the pleasure, being excused from the pain.
</p><p>
<b>V. When pleasures and pains are equal, they mutually destroy each other: when the one exceeds, the excess gives the true quantity of pleasure or pain.</b> For nine degrees of pleasure, less by nine degrees of pain, are equal to nothing: but nine degrees of one, less by three degrees of the other, give fix of the former net and true.
</p><p>
<b>VI. As therefore there may be true pleasure and pain: so there may be some pleasures, which compared with what attends or follows them, not only may vanish into nothing, but may even degenerate into pain, and ought to be reckoned as pains;<a> and vice versa some pains, that may be annumerated to pleasures.</b> For the true quantity of pleasure differs not from that quantity of true pleasure; or it is so much of that kind of pleasure, which is <em>true</em> (clear of all discounts and future payments): nor can the true quantity of pain not be the same with that quantity of true or mere pain. Then, the man who enjoys three degrees of such pleasure as will bring upon him nine degrees of pain, when three degrees of pain are set off to balance and link the three of pleasure, can have remaining to him only six degrees of pain: and into these therefore is his pleasure finally resolved. And so the three degrees of pain, which any one endures to obtain nine of pleasure, end in six of the latter. By the same manner of computing some pleasures will be found to be the loss of pleasure, compared with greater: and some pains the alleviation of pain; because by undergoing them greater are evaded.<a> Thus the natures of pleasures and pains are varied, and sometimes transmuted: which ought never to be forgot.
</p><p>
Nor this neither. As in the sense of most men, I believe, a little pain will weigh against a great deal of pleasure:<a> so perhaps there may be some pains, which exceed all pleasures; that is, such pains as no man would choose to suffer for any pleasure whatever, or at least any that we know of in this world. So that it is possible the difference, or excess of pain, may rise so high as to become immense: and then the pleasure to be set against that pain will be but a point, or cypher: a quantity of no value.
</p><p>
<b>VII. Happiness differs not from the true quantity of pleasure, unhappiness of pain. Or: any being may be said to be so far happy, as his pleasures are true, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</b> That cannot be the happiness of any being, which is bad for him: nor can happiness be disagreeable. It must be something therefore, that is both agreeable and good for the possessor. Now present pleasure is for the present indeed agreeable; but if it be not true, and he who enjoys it must pay more for it than it is worth, it cannot be for his good, or good for him. This therefore cannot be his <em>happiness</em>. Nor, again, can that pleasure be reckoned happiness, for which one pays the full price in pain: because these are quantities which mutually destroy each other. But yet since happiness is something, which, by the general idea of it, must be desirable, and therefore agreeable, it must be some kind of pleasure:<a> and this, from what has been said, can only be such pleasure as is true. That only can be both agreeable and good for him. And thus everyone’s happiness will be as his true quantity of pleasure.
</p><p>
One, that loves to make objections, may demand here, whether there may not be happiness without pleasure: whether a man, may not be said to be happy in respect to those evils, which he escapes, and yet knows nothing of: and whether there may not be such a thing as negative happiness. I answer, an exemption from misfortunes and pains is a high privilege, though we should not be sensible what those misfortunes or dangers are, from which we are delivered, and in the larger use of the word may be styled a happiness. Also, the absence of pain or unhappiness may perhaps be called negative happiness, since the meaning of that phrase is known. But in proper speaking happiness always includes something positive. For <em>mere</em> indolence resulting from insensibility, or joined with it, if it be happiness, is a happiness infinitely diminished: that is, it is no more a happiness, than it is an unhappiness; upon the confine of both, but neither. At best it is but the happiness of stocks and stones:<a> and to these I think happiness can hardly be in strictness allowed. ’Tis the privilege of a stock to be what it is, rather than to be a miserable being: this we are sensible of, and therefore, joining this privilege with our own sense of it, we call it happiness; but this is what it is in our manner of apprehending it, not what it is in the stock itself. A sense indeed of being free from pains and troubles is attended with happiness: but then the happiness flows from the sense of the case, and is a positive happiness. While a man reflects upon his negative happiness, as it is called, and enjoys it, he makes it positive: and perhaps a sense of immunity from the afflictions and miseries everywhere so obvious to our observation is one of the greatest pleasures in this world.
</p><p>
<b>VIII. That being my be said to be ultimately happy, in some degree or other, the sum total of whose pleasures exceeds the sum of all his pains: or, ultimate happiness is the sum of happiness, or true pleasure, at the foot of the account.</b> And so on the other side, <b>that being may be said to be ultimately unhappy, the sum of all whose pains exceeds that of all his pleasures.</b>
</p><p>
<b>IX. To make itself happy is a duty, which every being, in proportion to its capacity, owes to itself; and that, which every intelligent being may be supposed to aim at, in general.</b><a> For happiness is some quantity of true pleasure: and that pleasure, which I call true, may be considered by itself, and so will be justly desirable (according to propositions <a href="#prop2">II</a>, and <a href="#prop3">III</a>). On the contrary, unhappiness is certainly to be avoided: because being a quantity of mere pain, it may be considered by itself, as a real, mere evil, <abbr>etc.</abbr> and because if I am obliged to pursue happiness, I am at the same time obliged to recede, as far as I can, from its contrary. All this is self-evident. And hence it follows, that,
</p><p>
<b>X. We cannot act with respect to either ourselves, or other men, as being what we and they are, unless both are considered as being: susceptive of happiness and unhappiness, and naturally desirous of the one and averse to the other.</b> Other animals may be considered after the same manner in proportion to their several degrees of apprehension.
</p><p>
But that the nature of happiness, and the road to it, which is so very apt to be mistaken, may be better understood; and true pleasures more certainly distinguished from false; the following propositions must still be added.
</p><p id="prop11">
<b>XI. As the true and ultimate happiness of no being can he produced by any thing, that interferes with truth, and denies the natures of things: so neither can the practice of truth make any being ultimately unhappy.</b> For that, which contradicts nature and truth, opposes the will of the Author of nature (whose existence, <abbr>etc.</abbr> I shall prove afterwards); and to suppose, that an inferior being may in opposition to His will <em>break through</em> the constitution of things, and by so doing make himself happy, is to suppose that being more potent than the Author, of nature, and consequently more potent than the author of the nature and power of that very being himself, which is absurd. And as to the other part of the proposition it is also absurd to think, that, by the constitution of nature and will of its author, any being should be finally miserable only for conforming himself to truth, and owning things and the relations lying between them to be what they are. It is much the same as to say, God has made it natural to contradict nature; or unnatural, and therefore punishable, to act according to nature and reality. If such a blunder (excuse the boldness of the word) could be, it must come either through a defect of power in Him to cause a better and more equitable scheme, or from some delight, which he finds in the misery of his dependents. The former cannot be ascribed to the First cause, who is the fountain of power: nor the latter to Him, who gives so many proofs of his goodness and beneficience. Many beings may be said to be happy; and there are none of us all, who have not many enjoyments: whereas did he delight in the infelicity of those beings, which depend upon Him, it must be natural to Him to make them unhappy, and then not one of them would be otherwise in any respect. The world in that case instead of being such a beautiful, admirable system, in which there is only a mixture of evils, could have been only a scene of mere misery, horror, and torment.
</p><p>
That either the enemies of truth (wicked men) should be ultimately happy, or the religious observers of it (good men) ultimately unhappy, is such injustice, and an evil so great, that sure no Manichean will allow such a superiority of his evil principle over the good, as is requisite to produce and maintain it.
</p><p>
<b>XII. The genuine happiness of every being must be something, that is not incompatible with or destructive of its nature,<a> or the superior or better part of it, if it be mixed.</b> For instance, nothing can be the true happiness of a <em>rational</em> being, that is inconsistent with <em>reason</em>. For all pleasure, and therefore be sure all clear pleasure and true happiness must be something agreeable <a href="#IIprop1">(proposition I.)</a>: and nothing can be agreeable to a reasoning nature, or (which is the same) to the reason of that nature, which is repugnant and disagreeable to reason. If any thing becomes agreeable to a rational being, which is not agreeable to reason, it is plain his reason is lost, his nature depressed, and that he now lists himself among irrationals, at least as to that particular. If a being finds pleasure in anything unreasonable, he has an unreasonable pleasure; but a rational nature can like nothing of that kind without a contradiction to itself. For to do this would be to act, as if it was the contrary to what it is. Lastly, if we find hereafter, that whatever interferes with reason, interferes with truth, and to contradict either of them is the same thing; then what has been said under the former proposition, does also confirm this: as what has been said in proof of this, does also confirm the former.
</p><p>
<b>XIII. Those pleasures are true, and to be reckoned into our happiness, against which there lies no reason.</b> For when there is no reason against any pleasure, there is always one for it,<a> included in the term. So when there is no reason for undergoing pain (or venturing it), there is one against it.
</p><p>
Observation: There is therefore no necessity for men to torture their inventions in finding out arguments to justify themselves in the pursuits after worldly advantages and enjoyments, provided that neither these enjoyments, nor the means by which they are attained, contain the violation of any truth, by being unjust, immoderate, or the like.<a> For in this case there is no reason why we should not desire them, and a direct one, why we should, <abbr xml:lang="la">viz.</abbr> because they are enjoyments.
</p><p>
XIV. To conclude this section, <b>The way to happiness and the practice of truth incur the one into the other.</b><a> For no being can be styled happy, that is not ultimately so: because if all his pains exceed all his pleasures, he is so far from being happy, that he is a being unhappy or miserable, in proportion to that excess. Now by <a href="#prop11">proposition XI.</a> nothing can produce the ultimate happiness of any being, which interferes with truth: and therefore whatever does produce that, must be something which is consistent and coincident with this.
</p><p>
Two things then (but such as are met together, and embrace each other), which are to be religiously regarded in all our conduct, are truth (of which in the preceding section) and happiness (that is, such pleasures, as company, or follow the practice of truth, or are not inconsistent with it: of which I have been treating in this). And as that religion, which arises from the distinction between moral good and evil, was called <em>natural</em>, because grounded upon truth and the natures of things: so perhaps may that too, which proposes happiness for its end, in as much as it proceeds upon that difference, which there is between true pleasure and pain, which are physical (or natural) good and evil. And since both these unite so amicably, and are at last the same, here is <em>one</em> religion which may be called natural upon <em>two</em> accounts.
</p>
<h2>Section III. Of reason, and the ways of discovering truth</h2>
<p>
My manner of thinking, and an objection <a href="#truth">formerly made</a>, oblige me in the next place to say something concerning the means of knowing, what is true: whether there are any, that are sure, and which one may safely rely upon. For if there be not, all that I have written is an amusement to no purpose. Besides, as this will lead me to speak of reason, <abbr>etc.</abbr> some truths may here (as some did in the former section) fall in our way, which may be profitable upon many occasions; and what has been already asserted, will also be further confirmed.
</p><p>
<b>I. An intelligent being, such as is <a href="#prop1">mentioned before</a>, must have some immediate objects of his understanding; or at least a capacity of having such.</b> For if there be no object of his intellect, he is intelligent of nothing, or not intelligent. And if there are no immediate objects, there can be none at all: because every object must be such (an object) either in itself immediately; or by the intervention of another, which is immediate: or of several, one of which must at least be immediate.
</p><p>
<b>II. An intelligent being among the immediate objects of his mind may have some, that are abstract and general.</b> I shall not at present inquire, how he comes by them (it matters not how), since this must be true, if there is any such thing as a rational being. For that reason is something different from the knowledge of particulars may appear from hence; because it is not confined to particular things or cases. What is reason in one instance, is so in another. What is reasonable with respect to Quinctius, is so in respect of Nævius.<a> Reason is performed in <em>species</em>. A rational being therefore must have some, of these <em>species</em> (I mean specific and abstract <em>ideas</em>) to work with; or some superior method, such as perhaps some higher order of reasoners may have, but we have not.
</p><p>
The knowledge of a particular <em>idea</em> is only the particular knowledge of that <em>idea</em> or thing: there it ends. But reason is something universal, a kind of general instrument, applicable to particular things and cases as they occur. We reason about particulars, or from them; but not <em>by</em> them.
</p><p>
In fact we find within ourselves many logical, metaphysical, mathematical ideas, no one of which is limited to any particular, or individual thing: but they comprehend whole classes and kinds. And it is by the help of these that we reason, and demonstrate. So that we know from within ourselves, that intelligent beings not only may have such abstract ideas, as are mentioned in the proposition, but that some actually have them: which is enough for my purpose.
</p><p id="prop3b">
<b>III. Those ideas or objects, that are immediate, will be adequately and truly known to that mind, whose ideas they are.</b> For ideas can be no further the ideas of any mind, than that mind has (or may have) a perception of them: and therefore that mind must perceive the whole of them; which is to know them adequately.
</p><p>
Again, these ideas being immediate, nothing (by the term) can intervene to increase, diminish, or any way alter them. And to say the mind does not know them truly, implies a contradiction: because it is the same as to say, that they are misrepresented; that is, that there are intervening and misrepresenting ideas.
</p><p>
And lastly, there cannot be an immediate perception of that, which is not; nor therefore of any immediate object otherwise, than as it is. We have indeed many times wrong notions, and misperceptions of things: but then these things are not the immediate objects. They are things, which are notified to us by the help of organs and media, which may be vitiated, or perhaps are defective at best and incapable of transmitting things as they are in themselves, and therefore occasion imperfect and false images. But then, even in this case, those images and ideas that are immediate to the percipient, are perceived as they are: and that is the very reason, why the originals, which they should exhibit truly, but do not, are not perceived as they are. In short, I only say the mind must know its own <em>immediate ideas</em>.
</p><p>
<b>IV. What has been said of these ideas, which are immediate, may be said also of those relations or respects, which any of those ideas bear immediately each to other: they must be known immediately and truly.</b> For if the relation be immediate, the ideas cannot subsist without it; it is of their nature: and therefore they cannot be known adequately, but this must be known too. They are in this respect like the <em>ideas</em> of whole and part. The one cannot be without the other: nor either of them not discover that relation, by which the one must be always bigger and the other less.
</p><p>
To say no more, we may satisfy ourselves of the truth of this, as well as of the foregoing propositions, from the experiences of our own minds: where we find many relations, that are immediately seen, and of which it is not in our power to doubt.<a> We are conscious of a knowledge, that consists in the intuition of these relations. Such is the evidence of those truths, which are usually called axioms, and perhaps of some short demonstrations.
</p><p>
<b>V. Those relations or respects, which are not immediate, or apparent at the first view, may many times be discovered by intermediate relations; and with equal certainty.</b> If the ratio of B to D does not instantly show itself; yet if the ratio of B to C<a> does, and that of C to D,<a> from hence the ratio of B to D<a> is known also. And if the mean quantities were ever so many, the same thing would follow; provided the reason of every quantity to that, which follows next in the series, be known. For the truth of this I vouch the mathematicians:<a> as I might all, that know any science, for the truth of the proposition in general. For thus theorems and derivative truths are obtained.
</p><p>
<b>VI. If a proposition be true, it is always so in all the instances and uses, to which it is applicable.</b> For otherwise it must be both true and false. Therefore
</p><p>
<b>VII. By the help of truths already known more may be discovered.</b> For
</p><p>
1. Those inferences, which arise presently from the application of general truths to the particular things and cases contained under them, must be just. <abbr>E.g.</abbr> The whole is bigger than a part: therefore A (some particular thing) is more than half A. For it is plain that A is contained in the <em>idea</em> of whole, as half A is in that of part. So that if the antecedent proposition be true, the consequent, which is included in it, follows immediately, and must also be true. The former cannot be true, unless the other be so too. What agrees to the genus, species, definition, whole, must agree to the species, individuals, thing defined, the part. The existence of an effect infers directly that of a cause; of one correlate that of the other; and so on. And what is said here holds true (by the preceding proposition) not only in respect of axioms and first truths, but also and equally of theorems and other general truths, when they are once known. These may be capable of the like applications: and the truth of such consequences, as are made by virtue of them, will always be as evident as that of those theorems themselves.
</p><p>
2. All those conclusions, which are derived through mean propositions, that are true, and by just inferences, will be as true as those, from which they are derived. My meaning is this: every just consequence is founded in some known truth, by virtue of which one thing follows from another, after the manner of steps in an algebraic operation: and if inferences are so founded, and just, the things inferred must be true, if they are made from true premises.
</p><p>
Let this be the form of an argument. M=P: S=M: <i xml:lang="la">ergo</i> S=P. Here if S=M be false, nothing is concluded at all: because the middle proposition is in truth not S=M, but perhaps S=M<i>a</i>, which is foreign to the purpose. If S=M be true, but M=P false, then the conclusion will indeed be a right conclusion from those premises: but they cannot show, that S=P, because the first proposition if it was expressed according to truth would be M<i>e</i>=P, which is another thing, and has no place in the argument. But if these two propositions are both true, M=P, S=M, then it will not only be rightly concluded, but also true, that S=P. For the second or middle proposition does so connect the other two, by taking in due manner a term from each of them, (or to speak with the logicians, by separately comparing the predicate or major term of the conclusion with the medium in the first proposition, and the subject or minor term with it in the second), that if the first and second are true, the third must be so likewise: all being indeed no more than this, P=M=S. For here the inference is just by what goes before, being founded in some such truth as this, and resulting immediately from the application of it, <i xml:lang="la">Quæ eidem æqualía sunt, &amp; inter se sunt æqualia</i>; or <i xml:lang="la">Quæ conveniunt in eodem tertio, etiam inter se conveniunt</i>; or the like.<a> Now if an inference thus made is justifiable, another made after the same manner, when the truth discovered by it is made one of the premises, must be so too; and so must another after that; and so on. And if the last, and all the intermediate inferences be as right, as the first is supposed to be, it is no matter to what length the process is carried. All the parts of it being locked together by truth, the last result is derived through such a succession of mean propositions, as render its title to our assent not worse by being long.
</p><p>
Since all the forms of true syllogisms may be proved to conclude rightly, all the advances made in the syllogistic method toward the discovery or confirmation of truth, are so many instances and proofs of what is here asserted. So also are the performances of the mathematicians. From some self-evident truths, and a few easy theorems, which they set out with at first, to what immense lengths, and through what a train of propositions have they propagated knowledge! How numerous are their theorems and discoveries now, so far once out of human ken!
</p><p>
I do not enter so far into the province of the logician as to take notice of the difference there is between the analytic and synthetic methods of coming at truth, or proving it; whether it is better to begin the disquisition from the subject, or from the attribute. If by the use of proper media anything can be shown to be, or not to be, I care not from what term the demonstration or argument takes its rise. Either way propositions may beget their like, and more truth be brought into the world.
</p><p>
<b>VIII. That power, which any intelligent being has of surveying his own ideas, and comparing them; of forming to himself out of those, that are immediate and abstract, such general and fundamental truths, as he he can be sure of;<a> and of making such inferences and conclusions as are agreeable to them, or to any other truth, after it comes to he known; in order to find out more truth, prove or disprove some assertion, resolve some question, determine what is fit to be done upon occasion, <abbr>etc.</abbr> the case or thing under consideration being first fairly stated and prepared, is what I mean by the faculty of reason, or what intitles him to the epithet rational.</b> Or in short, <b>Reason is a faculty of making such inferences and conclusions, as are mentioned under the preceding proposition, from anything known, or given.</b>
</p><p>
The Supreme being has no doubt a direct and perfect intuition of things, with their natures and relations, lying as it were all before Him, and pervious to His eye: or at least we may safely say, that He is not obliged to make use of our operose methods by ideas and inferences; but knows things in a manner infinitely above all our conceptions. And as to superior finite natures, what other means of attaining to the knowledge of things they may have, is a thing not to be told by me; or how far they may excel us in this way of finding truth. I have an eye here chiefly to our own circumstances. Reason must be understood, when it is ascribed to God, to be the Divine reason; when to other beings above us, to be their reason; and in all of them to transcend ours, as much as their natures respectively do our nature.<a>
</p><p>
It cannot be amiss to note further, that though a man, who truly uses his rational powers, has abstract and universal ideas, obtained by reflection; out of these frames to himself general truths, or apprehends the strength of such, and admits them, when they occur to him; by these, as by so many standards, measures and judges of things; and takes care to have the materials; which he makes use of in reasoning, to be rivetted and compacted together by them: yet by a <em>habit</em> of reasoning he may come to serve himself of them, and apply them so quick, that he himself shall scarce observe it. Nay, most men seem to reason by virtue of a habit acquired by conversation, practice in business, and examples of others, without knowing what it is, that gives the solidity even to their own just reasonings: just as men usually learn rules in arithmetic, govern their accounts by them all their days, and grow very ready and topping in the use of them, without ever knowing or troubling their heads about the demonstration of any one of them. But still though this be so, and men reason without adverting upon general ideas and abstract truths, or even being aware that there are any such, as it were by rule or a kind of rote; yet such there are, and upon them rests the weight of reason as its foundation.
</p><p>
This, by the way, helps us to. detect the cause, why the generality of people are so little under the dominion of reason: why they sacrifice it to their interests and passions so easily; are so obnoxious to prejudices, the influence of their company, and din of a party; so apt to change, though the case remains the very same; so unable to judge of things, that are ever so little out of the way, and so conceited and positive in matters, that are doubtful, or perhaps to discerning persons manifestly false. Their reasoning proceeds in that track, which they happen to be got into, and out of which they know not one step, but all is to them <i xml:lang="la">Terra incognita</i>; being ignorant of the scientific part, and those universal, unalterable principles, upon which true reasoning depends, and to find which and the true use of them are required cool hours and an honest application, beside many preparatives.
</p><p>
In the next place it must be noted, that one may reason truly from that, which is only probable, or even false.<a> Becauie just inferences may be made from propositions of these kinds: that is, such inferences may be made as are founded in certain truths, though those propositions themselves are not certainly true. But then what follows, or is concluded from thence, will be only probable, or false, according to the quality of that proposition, or those propositions, from which the inference is made.
</p><p>
Again; it should be observed, that what I have said of reasoning, chiefly belongs to it as it is an <em>internal</em> operation. When we are to present our reasonings to others, we must transfer our thoughts to them by such ways as we can. The case is to be stated in a manner suitable to their capacities; a fair narration of matters of fact, and their circumstances, to be made; many times persons and things to be described by proper <em>diatyposes</em>, and the like: all which are additional labor, and take up much room in discourses and books, and are performed by different authors, upon different subjects, and in different kinds of writing, with an infinite variety of methods and forms, according to men’s different views and capacities; and many times not without a necessity of some condescensions, ascititious advantages, and even applications to the passions. But notwithstanding this, in strict reasoning nothing is required, but to lay steps in a due order, firmly connected, and expressed properly, without flourish;<a> and to arrive at truth by the shortest and clearest gradation we are able.
</p><p>
Once more; perhaps disputacious men may say I ascribe the investigation of truth to one faculty, when it is in reality the joint business of several. For when we go about this work, we are forced to make use of subordinate powers, and even external helps; to draw diagrams and put cases in our own imagination; to correct the images there, compound them, divide them, abstract from them; to turn over our memory, and see what has been entered and remains in that register; even to consult books, and use pen and ink. In short, we assemble all such axioms, theorems, experiments and observations, as are already known, and appear capable of serving us, or present themselves upon the opening and analysis of the question, or case, before us. And when the mind has thus made its tour, fetched in materials from every quarter, and set them in its own view; then it contemplates, compares, and methodizes them; gives the first place to this, the second to that, and so on; and when trials do not succeed rightly, rejects some, adopts others, shifts their order, <abbr>etc.</abbr> till at last the, series is so disposed, that the thing required comes up resolved, proved, or disproved by a just conclusion from proper premises. Now in this process there seem to be many faculties concerned; in these acts of circumspection, recollection, invention, reflection, comparing, methodizing, judging. But what if all this be so? I do not exclude the use of such subservient powers, or other helps, as are necessary to the exerting this faculty of reason; nor deny the mind matter to work upon. I may allow all the intellectual faculties their proper offices, and yet make reason to be what I have described it to be.
</p><p>
<b>IX. There is such a thing as right reason: or, Truth may be discovered by reasoning.</b><a> The word “reason” has several acceptations. Sometimes it is used for that power mentioned in the last proposition; as when we say, “Man is a being endowed with reason.” And then the sense of this proposition must be this; that there is such a use to be made of this power, as is right, and will manifest truth. Sometimes it seems to be taken for those general truths, of which the mind possesses itself from the intimate knowledge of its own ideas, and by which it is governed in its inferences and conclusions; as when we say, “Such a thing is agreeable to reason:” for that is as much as to say, it is agreeable to the said general truths, and that authentic way of making deductions, which is founded in them. And then the sense of this proposition is, that there are such general truths, and such a right way of inferring. Again; sometimes it seems to stand only for some particular truth, as it is apprehended by the mind with the causes of it, or the manner of its derivation from other truth: that is, it differs not from truth execept in this one respect, that it is considered not barely in itself, but as the effect and result of a process of reasoning; or it is truth with the arguments for our assent, and its evidences about it; as when it is said, “that such or such an assertion is reason.” And then the sense of the proposition is, that there are truths so to be apprehended by the mind. So all comes to this at last; truth (or there are truths, which) may be discovered, or found to be such, <em>by reasoning</em>.
</p><p>
If it were not so, our rational faculties, the noblest we have, would be vain.
</p><p>
Beside, that it is so, appears from the foregoing propositions and what we know within ourselves. ’Tis certain we have immediate and abstract ideas: the relations of these are adequately known to the mind, whose ideas they are: the propositions expressing these relations are evidently known to be true: and these truths must have the common privilege and property of all truths, to be true in all the particulars and uses, to which they are applicable. If then any things are notified to us by the help of our senses, or present themselves by any other way or means, to which these truths may be immediately applied, or from whence deductions may be made after the forementioned manner, new truths may be thus collected. And since these new truths, and the numerous descendents, that may spring from their loins, may be used still in the same manner, and be as it were the seed of more truth, who can tell at what undescried fields of knowledge even men may at length arrive? At least nobody can doubt, but that much truth, and particularly of that kind, which is most useful to us in our conduct here, is discoverable by this method.
</p><p>
They, who oppugn the force and certainty of reason, and treat right reason as a Chimæra, must argue against reason either with reason, or without reason. In the latter way they do nothing: and in the former they betray their own cause, and establish that, which they labor to dethrone. To prove there is no such thing as right reason by any good argument, is indeed impossible: because that would be to show there is such a thing, by the manner of proving, that there is not.
</p><p>
And further, if this proposition be not true, there is no right reasoning in Euclid; nor can we be sure, that what is there demonstrated, is true. But to say this I am sure is absurd. Nor do I desire, that this proposition, which I here maintain, should be esteemed more certain than those demonstrated by him: and so certain it must be: because there can be no certainty in them, if this be not true.
</p><p>
The great objection against all this is taken from the many instances of false reasoning and ignorance, with which the practices, discourses, writings of mankind are too justly taxed. But, in answer to it, I would have it minded, that I do not say, men may not by virtue of their freedom break off their meditations and inquiries prematurely, before they have taken a sufficient survey of things; that they may not be prepossessed with inveterate errors, biased by interest, or carried violently down with the stream of a sect or fashion, or dazled by some darling notion or bright name;<a> that they may not be unprovided of a competent flock of <i xml:lang="la">præcognita</i> and preparative knowledge; that (among other things) they may not be ignorant of the very nature of reasoning, and what it is that gives sinews to an inference, and makes it just; that they may not want philosophy, history, or other learning requisite to the understanding and stating of the question truly; that they may not have the confidence to pretend to abilities, which they have not, and boldly to judge of things, as if they were qualified, when they are not; that they may not be impotent in their elocution, and misrepresent their own thoughts, by expressing themselves ill, even when within themselves they reason well; that many understandings may not be naturally gross, good heads often indisposed, and the ablest judges sometimes overseen, through inadvertence or haste: I say none of these things. The contrary I confess is manifest: and it is in opposition to those errors, which appear in these cases under the name of reason, that we are forced to add the epithet <em>right</em>, and to say <em>right reason</em> instead of reason only; to distinguish it from that, which wrongfully assumes that appellation. Nor, moreover, do I say, that by reasoning the truth is to be discovered in every case: that would imply an extent of knowledge, which we cannot pretend to. I only say, that there is such a thing as right reason, and truth discoverable by it.
</p><p>
I might add, that he, whose faculties are entire and sound, and who by a proper exercise of his mind in sdentific sindies first opens and enlarges its capacity, and renders his intellectuals active and penetrating; takes care to furnish himself with such leading truths, as may be useful to him, and of which he is assured in his own breast; and in treating any subject keeps them still in his eye, so that his discourse may be agreeable to them: I say, such a one is not in much danger of concluding falsely. He must either determine rightly, or soon find, that the subject lies out of his reach. However he will be sensible, that there are many things within his sphere, concerning which he may reason; and that there are truths to be found by this use of his faculties, in which he may securely acquiesce.
</p><p>
Thus <a href="#truth">that question supposed to be asked</a>, “How shall a man know, what is true?” is in part answered. More shall be added by and by: only a proposition or two, which ought not to be omitted, must be first inserted.
</p><p>
<b>X. To act according to right reason, and to act according to truth are in effect the same thing.</b> For in which sense soever the word “reason” is taken, it will stand either for truth itself, or for that, which is instrumental in discovering and proving it to be such: and then, with respect to this latter sense, whoever is guided by that faculty, whose office consists in distinguishing and pointing out truth, must be a follower of truth, and act agreeably to it. For to be governed by any faculty or power is to act according to the genuine decisions and dictates of it.
</p><p>
That reason, which is <em>right</em> (by the meaning of the words) must conclude rightly: but this it cannot do, if the conclusion is not true, or truth.
</p><p>
That is (for so I would be understood), if the principles and premises from whence it results are true,<a> and certainly known to be so, the conclusion may be taken as certain and absolute truth: but otherwise the truth obtained at the end of the argument is but hypothetical, or only this, that such a thing is so, if such another, or such others are so or so.
</p><p id="prop11b">
<b>XI. To be governed by reason is the general law imposed by the Author of nature<a> upon them, whose uppermost faculty is reason: as the dictates of it in particular cases are the particular laws, to which they are subject.</b> As there are beings, which have not so much as sense, and others that have no faculty above it; so there may be some, who are endowed with reason, but have nothing higher than that. It is sufficient at present to suppose there may be such. And then if reason be the uppermost faculty, it has a right to control the rest by being such. As in sensitive animals sense commands gravitation and mechanical motions in those instances, for which their senses are given, and carries them out into spontaneous acts: so in rational animals the gradation requires, that reason should command sense.
</p><p>
It is plain, that reason is of a commanding nature:<a> it enjoins this, condemns that, only allows some other things, and will be paramount (in an old word, <I xml:lang="grc">τὸ ἡγεμόνικὸν</i><a>) if it is at all. Now a being, who has such a determining and governing power so placed in his nature, as to be essential to him, is a being certainly framed to be governed by that power. It seems to be as much designed by nature, or rather the Author of nature, that rational animals should use their reason, and steer by it; as it is by the shipwright, that the pilot should direct the vessel by the use of the rudder he has fitted to it. The rudder would not be there, if it was not to be used: nor would reason be implanted in any nature only to be not cultivated and neglected. And it is certain, it cannot be used, but it must command: such is its nature.
</p><p>
It is not in one’s power deliberately to resolve not to be governed by reason. For (here the same way of arguing may be used, that was lately) “if he could do this, he must either have some reason for making that resolution, or none. If he has none, it is a resolution, that stands upon no foundation, and therefore in course falls: and if he has some reason for it, he is governed by reason. This demonstrates that reason must govern.
</p><p>
<b>XII. If a rational being, as such, is under an obligation to obey reason, and this obedience, or practice of reason, coincides with the observation of truth, these things plainly follow.</b>
</p><p>
1. That what is said in <a href="#prop4">section I, proposition IV</a> must be true with respect to such a being for this further cause; because to him nothing can be right, that interferes with reason, and nothing can interfere with truth, but it must interfere with reason. Such a harmony there is between them. For whatever is known to be true, reason either finds it, or allows it to be such. Nothing can be taken for true by a rational being, if he has a reason to the contrary. 2. That there is to a rational being such a thing as <em>religion</em>, which may also upon this further account properly be called <em>natural</em>. For certainly to obey the law, which the Author of his being has given him, is religion: and to obey the law, which He has given or revealed to him by making it to result from the right use of his own natural faculties, must be to him his <em>natural religion</em>. 3. A careful observation of truth, the way to happiness, and the practice of reason are in the issue the same thing. For, of the two last, each falls in with the first, and therefore each with other. And so, at last, natural religion is grounded upon this triple and strict alliance or union of truth, happiness, and reason, all in the same interest, and conspiring by the same methods, to advance and perfect human nature: and its truest definition is, “The pursuit of happiness by the practice of reason and truth.”
</p><p>
Permit me here again to insert an observation <i xml:lang="la">obiter</i>.
</p><p>
Observation: The <i xml:lang="grc">κριτήριον</i> of right reason and truth, or that which is to be regarded in judging of right and truth is <em>private</em>: that is, everyone must judge for himself. For since all reasoning is founded originally in the knowledge of one’s own private ideas, by virtue of which he becomes conscious of some first truths, that are undeniable; by which he governs his steps in his pursuits after more truths, <abbr>etc.</abbr> the criterion, or that by which he tries his own reasonings, and knows them to be right, must be the <em>internal</em> evidence he has already of certain truths, and the agreeableness of his inferences to them. One man can no more discern the objects of his own understanding and their relations, by the faculties of another, than he can see with another man’s eyes, or one ship can be guided by the helm of another. They must be his own faculties conscience, that must determine him. Therefore to demand another man’s assent to any thing without conveying into his mind such reasons, as may produce a sense of the truth of it, is to erect a tyranny over his understanding and to demand a tribute which it is <em>not possible</em> for him to pay.<a> It is true indeed, though I cannot see with another man’s eyes, yet I may be assisted by another, who has better eyes, in finding an object and the circumstances of it; and so men may be assisted in making their judgments of things. They may be informed of things, which they did not know before, and which yet require a place among those that are to be considered: and they may be directed what to advert principally upon; how to state the question; how to methodize their thoughts, and in general how to reason: especially if they want learning, or have only that part of it, which is little conversant in close reflections, and does not teach them to reason, or (as the case too often is) teaches them not to reason. But still this is all in order to produce such a light in them, that by it <em>they</em> may see and judge for themselves. An opinion, though ever so true and certain to one man, canot be transfused into another as true and certain by any other way, but by opening his understanding, and assisting him so to order his conception, that he may find the reasonableness of it <em>within himself</em>.
</p><p>
To prevent mistakes I pray take notice here, that, though I say men must judge for themselves, I do not say they must in all cases <em>act</em> according to their private and single judgments. In respect of such things, as are private, and concern themselves <em>only</em>, or such as are left open and subject to every man’s own sense, they may and ought, only preserving a due deference to them, who differ from them, and are known upon other occasions to have more knowledge and literature than themselves: but when a society is concerned, and has determined anything, it may be considered as one person, of which he, who dissents from the rest, is only perhaps a small particle; and then his judgment will be in a manner absorbed and drowned in that of the majority, or of them to whom the power of judging is intrusted. But I must not digress too far from the main business, the ways of coming at <em>truth</em>.
</p><p>
<b>XIII. The reports of sense are not of equal authority with the clear demonstrations of reason, when they happen to differ.</b> It is true, the <em>ideas</em> caused by the impression of sensible objects are real ideas, and truly known to the mind as they are in themselves; and the mind may use them, and reason truly upon them: that is, the mind may make a right use of the ideas, which it finds in itself. But them whether these are the true ectypes of their originals, and drawn to the life, is many times a question; and many times it is evident they are not. For that which has been anticipated under <a href="#prop3b">proposition III.</a> but properly belongs to this, must be acknowledged. They are conveyed through media and by instruments susceptive of different dispositions and alterations, and may consequently produce different representations: and these cannot all be right. But suppose those instruments and media to be as entire and pure, as when entirest and purest; yet still there may be in many respects an incapacity in the faculty to notify things just as they are. How mightily are the shape and size of a visible object varied upon us according to its distance, and the situation of the place, from whence the prospect is taken? Now these things cannot be said of the reports, or rather determinations of reason. For in pure reasoning we use our own ideas for <em>themselves</em>, and such as the mind knows them to be, not as representatives of things, that may be falsely exhibited. This <em>internal</em> reasoning may indeed be wrongly applied to <em>external</em> things, if we reason about them as being what they are not: but then this is the fault not of reason, but of sense, which reports the case wrong; or perhaps of the person, who has not been sufficiently industrious to inform himself.
</p><p>
The same familiar instance of vision proves further, that reason may be applied to <em>overrule</em> and <em>correct</em> sense. For when the pictures of objects are pricked out by the pencils of rays upon the retina of the eye, and do not give the true figure of those objects (as they not always do, being diversely projected, as the lines proceeding from the several points happen to fall upon that concave surface); this, though it might impose upon a being, that has no faculty superior to sense, does not impose upon our reason, which knows <em>how</em> the appearance is altered, and <em>why</em>. To think the sun<a> is not bigger, than it appears to the eye to be,<a> seems to be the last degree of stupidity. He must be a brute (so far from being a philosopher), who does not know, that the same line (<abbr xml:lang="la">v.g.</abbr> the diameter of the sun) at different distances subtends different angles at the eye. A small matter of reason may serve to confute sense in this: and the like cases.
</p><p>
Objection: How can reason be more certain than sense, since reason is founded in abstractions, which are originally taken from sensible objects? Answer: Perhaps the mind may, by being exercised at first about particular objects, by degrees find in itself this capacity of considering things by their species, making abstractions, <abbr>etc.</abbr> which it would not have done, had it never known any of these particulars. But then after it has found this capacity in itself, and attained to the knowledge of abstract and general ideas, I do not see why this capacity of reasoning by the help of them may not be tried, upon this proficience, to censure and correct the advices of sense concerning even such particulars, as first gave occasion to the mind to exert this capacity and raise itself. Is it a new thing for a scholar to make such a progress in learning, as to be able afterward to teach the master, from whom he received his first rudiments? May not the modern philosophers correct the ancients, because these first showed them the way, and led them into the study of nature? If we look impartially into the history of learning, and even of religion, we shall find that truth has generally advanced by degrees, and many times (very many; as if that was the method of introducing knowledge among men) risen out of fable and error, which gave occasion to those inquiries, by which themselves were detected. Thus blind ignorance was succeeded by a twilight of sense: this brightend by degrees: at last the sun as it were rose upon some parts of the commonwealth of learning, and cleared up many things; and I believe many more will in time be cleared, which, whatever men think, are yet in their dark and uncultivated state. The understanding, though it starts from particulars, in time makes a further progress, taking in generals, and such notions logical, metaphysical, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, as never could possibly come in by the senses.<a> Beside, further, the capacity itself of admitting and considering general ideas was originally in the mind, and is not derived from without. The intelligences communicated by sense are only an occasion of using what it had before.<a> Just as a master may, by the exercises he sets, excite the superior capacity of his scholar.
</p><p>
In a word, no man does, or can pretend to believe his senses, when he has a reason against it: which is an irrefragable proof, that reason is above sense and controls it. But,
</p><p>
<b>XIV. The reports of sense may be taken for true, when there is no reason against it.</b><a> Because when there is no reason not to believe, that alone is a reason for believing them. And therefore,
</p><p>
<b>XV. In this case to act according to them</b> (<abbr>i.e.</abbr> as taking the informations of sense to be true) <b>is to act according to reason and the great law of our nature.</b>
</p><p>
Thus it appears that there are two ways, by which we may assure ourselves of the truth of many things;<a> or at least may attain such a degree of certainty, as will be sufficient to determine our practice: by <em>reason</em>, and by <em>sense under the government of reason</em>: that is, when reason supports it, or at least does not oppose it. By the former we discover speculative truths; by the latter, or both together, matters of fact.
</p><p>
<b>XVI. Where certainty is not to be had,<a> probability must be substituted into the place of it</b>: that is, it must be considered, which side of the question is the more probable.</b>
</p><p>
Probability, or that, which in this case may incline one to believe any proposition to be true rather than false, or any thing to be rather than not to be, or the contrary, will generally show itself upon the application of these and such like rules. 1. That may be reckoned probable, which, in the estimation of reason, appears to be more agreeable to the constitution of nature. Nobody can certainly foretell, that sice-ace will come up upon two dies fairly thrown before ambs-ace: yet any one would choose to lay the former, because in nature there are twice as many chances for that as for the other. If a strolling wolf should light upon a lamb, it is not evidently known, that he will tear the lamb: but there is such a natural propension in that kind to do it, that nobody would much question the event. (This instance might have been taken from amongst men, who are generally, as far as they can be, wolves one to another.) If a parent causes his child to be instructed in the foundations of useful learning, educates him virtuously, and gives him his first impulse and direction in the way to true happiness, he will be more likely to proceed and continue in it; than he would be to hit upon it, and continue in it too, if he was left to himself to be carried away by his own passions, or the influence of those people, into whose hands he might fall, the bias of the former lying towards vice, and misery in the end, and the plurality of the latter being either wicked or ignorant or both. So that the advantage in point of probability is on the side of good education.<a> When Herodotus writes, that the Egyptian priests reported the sun had within the compass of 11,340 years twice risen where it now sets, and set where it rises,<a> what is fit to be believed concerning the truth of this relation (as of many others), is easily discernable by this rule. Herodotus, possibly delighting in teratical stories, might tell what he never heard: or the passage may be an interpolation; or it may be altered in transcribing: or the priests, who pretended much to a knowledge of great antiquities, might out of mere vanity, to show what children the Greeks were in respect of them, invent such a monstrous relation, and impose it upon them, whom they thought to have not much science among them: or it might be got into their memoirs before their time, who related it to Herodotus, and so pass upon posterity, as many other fictions and legends have done. These are such things, as are well known to have happened often. But that the diurnal rotation of the earth about her axis should be inverted, is a phenomenon, that has never been known to happen by any body else, either before or since; that is favored by no observation; and that cannot be without great alteration in the mundane system, or those laws by which the motions of the planets, and of our earth among the rest, are governed. That this account then may be false is very consistent with the humor and circumstances of mankind: but that it should be true is very inconsistent with those laws, by which the motions of the celestial bodies seem to be regulated, and tend to persevere in their present courses and directions. It is therefore in nature much more probable, that this account is false. The odds are on that side.  When any observation has hitherto constantly held true, or most commonly proved to be so, it has by this acquired an established credit; the cause may be presumed to retain its former force; and the effect may be taken as probable, if in the case before us there does not appear something particular, some reason for exception. No man can demonstrate, that the sun will rise again, yet everyone does, and must act, as if that was certain:<a> because we apprehend no decay in the causes, which bring about this appearance, nor have any other reason to mistrust the event, or think it will be otherwise a few hours hence, than it has been hitherto. There is no apodictical argument to prove, that any particular man will die: but yet he must be more than mad, who can presume upon immortality here, when he finds so many generations all gone to a man, and the same enemies, that have laid them prostrate, still pursuing their victories. These and such like, though in strictness perhaps not certainties, are justly current for such. So great is their probability. There are other observations, which, though not so infallible as those, deserve yet to be thought of, and to have a share in the direction of our judgments. <abbr>E.g.</abbr> There have been men in the world and no doubt still are, who, having had opportunities of imposing falsities upon mankind, of cheating, or committing other wickedness, have yet in spite of temptation preserved their integrity and virtue: but, since opportunity has so seldom failed to corrupt them who have been in possession of her, and men’s interests and passions continue in general the same, it is more probable her charms will still have the same power and effect, which they use to have; which whoever does not mind, will be woefully obnoxious to be abused by frauds pious and impious.<a> Briefly, when there is no particular reason for the contrary, what has oftenest happened, may from experience most reasonably be expected to happen again. 3. When neither nature nor other observations point out the probable conjecture to us, we must be determined (if it be necessary for us to be determined at all) by the reports, and sense of them, whom we apprehend, judging with the best skill we have,<a> to to be most knowing<a> and honest.<a> Of all these rules the first is that which deserves the principal regard: the other two are of use, when nature so utterly excludes us from her bosom, that no opportunity is allowed of making a judgment. Lastly, when nature, the frequent repetition of the same event, and the opinion of the best judges concur to make anything probable, it is so in the highest degree.
</p><p>
It appears from what has been said concerning the nature and foundations of probability, that the force of it results from observation and reason together. For here the one is not sufficient without the other. Reason without observation wants matter to work upon: and observations are neither to be made justly by ourselves, nor to be rightly chosen out of those made by others, nor to be aptly applied, without the assistance of reason. Both together may support opinion and practice in the absence of knowledge and certainty. For those observations upon the nature of men and things, which we have made ourselves, we know; and our own reasoning concerning them, and deductions from them we know: and from hence there cannot but arise in many cases an internal obligation to give our assent to this, rather than that; or to act one way, rather than another. And as to the observations of others, they may be so cautiously and skillfully selected, as to become almost our own; since our own reason and experience may direct us in the choice and use of them. The remarks and advice of old men,<a> who have gone through variety of scenes, lived long enough to see the consequences of their own and other people’s actings, and can now with freedom<a> look back and tell where they erred, are ordinarily sure to be preferred to those of young and raw actors. The gnomæ, apologues, <abbr>etc.</abbr> of wise men, and such as have made it their business to be useful spies upon nature and mankind, national proverbs, and the like,<a> may be taken as maxims commonly true. Men in their several professions and arts, in which they have been educated, and exercised themselves all their days, must be supposed to have greater knowledge and experience, than others can usually have: and therefore, if through want of capacity or honesty they do not either lose, or belie their opportunities and experience, they are in respect of those things, to which they have been bred and inured, more to be relied upon. And, lastly, histories written by credible and industrious authors, and read with judgment, may supply us with examples, parallel cases, and general remarks, profitable in forming our manners, and opinions too. And by the frequent perusal of them, and meditation upon them, a dexterity in judging of dubious cases is acquired. Much of the temper of mankind, much of the nature and drift of their counsels, much of the course of Divine providence is visible in them.
</p><p>
To conclude; that we ought to follow probability, when certainty leaves us, is plain: because then it becomes the only light and guide we have. For unless it is better to wander and fluctuate in absolute uncertainty than to follow such a guide; unless it be reasonable to put out our candle, because we have not the light of the sun, it must be reasonable to direct our steps by probability, when we have nothing clearer to walk by. And if it be reasonable, we are obliged to do it by <a href="#prop11b">proposition XI.</a> When there is nothing above probability, it does govern; when there is nothing in the opposite scale, or nothing of equal weight, this in the course of nature must turn the beam. Though a man, to resume the instance before, cannot demonstrate that sice-ace will come up before ambs-ace, he would find himself obliged (if he could be obliged to lay at all) to lay on that side: nor could he not choose to do it. Though he would not be certain of the chance, he would be certain of his own obligation, and on which side it lay.
</p><p>
Here then is another way of discovering, if not <em>truth</em>, yet what in practice may be supposed to be truth. That is, we may by this way discover, whether such propositions as these be true, “I ought to do this, rather than that;” or, “to think so, rather than the contrary.”
</p><p>
Observation: I have done now what I chiefly intended here. But, over and above that, we may almost from the premises collect,
</p><p>
First, the principal causes of error, which I take to be such as these. 1. Want of faculties; when men pretend to judge of things above them. As some (straying out of their proper element, and falling into the dark, where they find no ideas but their own dreams, come to) assert what they have no reason to assert: so others deny what there is the highest reason to believe, only because they cannot comprehend it. 2. Want of due reflection upon those ideas we have, or may have: by which it comes to pass, that men are destitute of that knowledge, which is gained by the contemplation of them, and their relations; misapply names, confusedly: and sometimes deal in a set of words and phrases, to which no ideas at all belong, and which have indeed no meaning. Of kin to this is, 3. Want of proper qualifications and <i xml:lang="grc">προπαιδεύματα</i>. As, when illiterate people invade the provinces of scholars; the half-lettered are forward, and arrogate to themselves what a modest, studious man dares not,<a> though he knows more; and scholars, that have confined themselves to one sort of literature, launch out into another: unsuccessfully all. 4. Not understanding in what the nature and force of a just consequence consists. Nothing more common than to hear people assert, that such a thing follows from such a thing; when it does not follow: <abbr>i.e.</abbr> when such a consequence is founded in no axiom, no theorem, no truth that we know of. 5. Defects of memory and imagination. For men in reasoning make much use of these: memory is upon many occasions consulted, and sometimes draughts made upon the phantasy. If then they depend upon these, and these happen to be weak, clouded, perverted any way, things may be misrepresented, and men led out of the way by misshapen apparitions. There ought to be therefore a little distrust of these faculties, and such proper helps ought to be used, as perhaps the best judgments want the most. 6. Attributing too much to sense. For as necessary as our senses are to us, there are certainly many things, which fall not within their notice; many, which cannot be exhibited after the manner of sensible objects, and to which no images belong. Every one, who has but just saluted the mathematics and philosophy, must be convinced, that there are many things in nature, which seem absurd to sense, and yet must be admitted. 7. Want of refinement, and the practice of thinking and reasoning by ourselves.<a> A rambling and irregular life must be attended with a loose and irregular head, ill-connected notions, and fortuitous conclusions. Truth is the offspring of silence, unbroken meditations, and thoughts often revised and corrected. 8. The strength of appetites, passions, prejudices. For by these the understanding may be corrupted, or over-borne: or at least the operations of the mind must be much obstructed by the intrusion of such solicitors, as are no retainers to the rational powers, and yet strong, and turbulent. Among other prejudices there is one of a particular nature, which you must have observed to be one of the greatest causes of modern irreligion. While some opinions and rites are carried to such an immoderate height, as exposes the absurdity of them to the view of almost everybody but them who raise them, not only gentlemen of the <i xml:lang="fr">belles lettres</i>, but even men of common sense, many times see through them; and then out of indignation and an excessive renitence, not separating that which is true from that which is false, they come to deny both, and fall back into the contrary extreme, a contempt of all religion in general.<a> 9. Ill stating of a question; when men either put it wrong themselves, or accept it so put from others. A small addition or falsity slipped into the case will ferment, and spread itself: an artificial color may deceive one: an encumbered manner may perplex one. The question ought to be presented before its judge clean, and in its natural state, without disguise or distortion. To this last may be subjoined another cause, nearly allied to it; not fixing the sense of terms, and (which must often follow) not rightly understanding what it is, that is to be examined and resolved.
</p><p>
Secondly, the reason why the many are commonly in the wrong and so wretchedly misjudge things. The generality of people are not sufficiently prepared, by a proper education, to find truth by reasoning. And of them, who have liberal education, some are soon immersed and lost in pleasures, or at least in fashionable methods of living, rolling from one visit or company to another,<a> and flying from nothing so much as from themselves and the quiet retreats proper for meditation and reasoning: others become involved in business and the intricate affairs of life, which demand their attention, and engross their time: others fall into a slothful neglect of their studies and disuse of what they have learnt, or want help and means to proceed, or only design to deceive life and gratify themselves with the amusements and sensual parts of learning: and others there are, whose misfortune it is to begin wrong, to begin with the conclusion; taking their opinions from places, where they have been bred, or accommodating them to their situation in the world, and the conditions of that employment, by which they are to get their bread, before they have ever considered them; and then making the subsequent business of their lives to dispute for them, and maintain them, right or wrong. If such men happen to be in the right, it is luck, and part of their portion, not the effect of their improvements: and if they happen to be in the wrong, the more they study, and the more learning they get, the more they are confirmed in their errors; and having set out with their backs upon truth, the further they go, the more they recede from it. Their knowledge is a kind of negative quantity, so much worse or less than no knowledge. Of this sort there are many: and very few indeed (with respect to the bulk of mankind), whose determinations and tenets were ever in the form of questions: there could not otherwise be so many sects and different denominations of men, as there are, upon the face of the earth. The sum of all in a few words is this: many qualifications are requisite in order to judge of some truths, and particularly those which are of greatest importance: proper learning and penetration, vacancy from business, a detachment from the interest of all parties, much sincerity and a perfect resignation to the government of reason and force of truth; which are things not to be reconciled with the usual ignorance, passions, tumultuary lives, and other circumstances which carry most men transverse.
<p>
<h2 id="sect4">Section IV. Of the Obligations of imperfect Beings with respect to their power of acting.</h2>
<p>
There remains yet another question, supposed also to be proposed by an objector, which must not be forgot; and upon which I shall bestow this very short section. The question was this: “If a man can find out truth, may he not want the power of acting agreeably to it?”
</p><p>
<b>I. Nothing is capable of no obligation.</b> For to Oblige nothing is the same as not to oblige.
</p><p>
<b>II. So far as any being has no power, or opportunity of doing any thing, so far is that being incapable of any obligation to do it:</b> or, <b>no being is capable of any obligation to do that, which it has not power or opportunity to do.</b> For that being, which has not the faculties or opportunity necessary to the doing of any thing, is in respect of that thing a being utterly inactive, no agent at all, and therefore as to that act nothing at all.
</p><p>
To require or command one to do any thing is to require him to apply a power superior to the resistence to be met with in doing it. To require him to apply such a power is the same as to require that his power of such a kind and degree be applied. But if he has no such power, then his power of that kind and degree is <em>nothing</em>: and it is nothing, that is required to be applied. Therefore nothing is required to be done. It is just the same, as if a man was commanded to do something with his third hand, when he has but two: which would be the same as to bid him to do it with no hand, or not bid him do it.
</p><p>
Without more ado, it is a truth confessed by everybody, that nobody is obliged to impossibilities.
</p><p>
From hence will follow, after the manner of corollaries, the two following propositions;
</p><p>
<b>III. Inanimate and inactive beings are capable of no obligation: nor merely sensitive of any obligation to act upon principles, or motives above sense.</b>
</p><p>
<b>IV. The obligations of beings intelligent and active must be proportionable to their faculties, powers, opportunities; and not more.</b>
</p><p>
<b>V. To endeavor may fitly express the use of all the opportunities and powers, that any intelligent and active, but imperfect, being has to act.</b> For to endeavor is to do what one can: and this as every such being may do, wherever he stands in the scale of imperfects, so none can do more. One may exert his endeavors with greater advantage or success, than another; yet still they are but endeavors.
</p><p>
<b>VI. The imputations of moral good and evil to beings capable of understanding and acting must be in proportion to their endeavors:</b> or, <b>their obligations reach, as far as their endeavors may.</b> This follows again from what has been said: and so does this,
</p><p>
VII. and lastly, <b>They who are capable of discerning truth, though not all truths, and of acting conformiably to it, though not always or in all cases, are nevertheless obliged to do these, as far as they are able:</b> or, <b>it it is the duty of such a being sincerely to endeavor to practice reason; not to contradict any truth, by word or deed; and in short, to treat everything as being what it is.</b>
</p><p>
Thus the general duties of rational beings, mentioned in or resulting from the preceding sections; are brought together, and finally fixed under the correction or limitation in this last proposition. This is the sum of their religion, from which no exemption or excuse lies. Everyone can endeeavor: everyone can do what he can. But in order to that everyone ought to be in earnest, and to exert himself heartily; not stifling his own conscience, not dissembling, suppressing, or neglecting his own powers.
</p><p>
And now needless to me seem those disputes about human liberty, with which men have tired themselves and the world. The case is much the same, as if a man should have some great reward or advantage offered to him, if he would get up and go to such a plaice to accept it, or do some certain thing for it, and he, instead of going or doing anything, falls into a tedious disquisition about his own freedom; whether he has the power to stir, or whether he is not chained to his seat, and necessitated to sit still. The short way of knowing this certainly is to try. If he can do nothing, no labor can be lost; but if he is capable of acting, and does not act, the consequences and blame must be justly chargeable upon himself. And I am persuaded, if men would be serious, and put forth themselves,<a> they would find by experience, that their wills are not so universally and peremptorily determined by what occurs, nor predestination and fate so rigid,<a> but that much is left to their own conduct.<a> Up and try.<a>
</p><p>
Sure it is in a man’s power to keep his hand from his mouth: if it is, it is also in his power to forbear excess in eating and drinking. If he has the command of his own feet, so as to go either this way or that or no whither, as sure he has, it is in his power to abstain from ill company and vicious places. And so on.</a>
</p><p>
This suggests a very material thought: that forbearances, at least in all ordinary cases, are within our power;<a> so that a man may if he will, forbear to do that, which contradicts truth: but where acting is required, that very often is not in his power. He may want abilities, or opportunities; and so may seem to contradict truth by his omission, which, if his infirmities and disadvantages were taken into the account, and the case was rightly stated, he would be found not to do.
</p>
<h2>Section V. Truths relating to the Deity. Of his existence, perfection, providence, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></h2>
<p>
I have shown in what the nature of moral good and evil consists; <abbr xml:lang="la">viz.</abbr> a conformity or disagreement to truth, and those things that are coincident with it, reason and happiness: also, how truth is discoverd; by sense, or reason, or both. I shall now specify some of those truths, which are of greatest importance and influence, and require more reasoning to discover them; leaving the rest: (common matters of fact) to the common ways of finding them. They respect principally either the Deity, or ourselves, or the rest of mankind. The first sort are the subject of this section.
</p><p id="v1">
<b>I. Where there is a subordination of causes and effects, there must necessarily be a cause in nature prior to the rest, uncaused.</b> Or thus, <b>Where there is a series, in which the existence of one thing depends upon another, the existence of this again upon same other, and so upwards, as the case shall be, there must be some independent being, upon whom it does originally depend.</b>
</p><p>
If Z (some body) be put into motion by Y, Y by X, and X by W, it is plain that X moves Y, and Y moves Z only as they are first moved, X by W, and Y by X: that Z, Y, X are moveds, or rather Z more Y more X, taken together,<a> are one moved: that W stands here as the first mover, or author of the motion, unmoved by any other: that therefore without W there would be a moved without a mover, which is absurd:<a> and lastly, that of what length soever the series may be, the case will be ever the same; <abbr>i.e.</abbr> if there be no First mover<a> unmoved, there must be a moved without a mover.
</p><p>
Further, if W, whom we will suppose to be an intelligent being, and to have a power of beginning motion, has this power originally in himself and independently of all others, then here not only the first mover in this series, but a First being and original cause is found. Because that, which has a power of beginning motion independent of any other, is a mover independent; and therefore is independent, or has an independent existence, since nothing can be a mover without <em>being</em>. But if W has not this power independently in himself, then he must receive it from some other, upon whom he depends, and whom we will call V. If then V has a power of conferring a faculty of producing motion originally and independently in himself, here will be a First, independent cause. And if it can be supposed, that he has it not thus, and that the series should rise too high for us to follow it; yet however we cannot but conclude, that there is some such cause, upon whom this train of beings and powers must depend, if we reason as in the former paragraph. For,
</p><p>
Universally, if Z be any effect whatsoever, proceeding from or depending upon Y as the cause of its existence, Y upon X, X upon W, it is manifest that the existence of all, Z, Y, X does originally come from W, which stands here as the Supreme cause, depending upon nothing: and that, without it X could not be, and consequently neither Y, nor Z. Z, Y, X, being all effects (or dependents), or rather Z more Y more X one effect, without W there would be an effect without a cause. Lastly, let this retrogression from effects to their causes be continued ever so far, the same thing will still recur, and without such a cause as is before mentioned the whole will be an effect without an efficient, or a dependent without any thing to depend upon; <abbr>i.e.</abbr> dependent, and not dependent.
</p><p>
Objection: The series may ascend infinitely,<a> and for that reason have no first mover or cause. Answer: If a series of bodies moved can be supposed to be infinite, then taken together it will be equal to an infinite body moved; and this moved will not less require a mover than a finite body, but infinitely more.  If I may not be permitted to place a first mover at the top of the series, because it is supposed to be infinite, and to have no beginning; yet still there must of necessity be some cause or author of the motion,<a> different from all these bodies, because their being (by the supposition) no one body in the series, that moves the next, but only in consequence of its being moved first itself, there is no one of them that is not moved, and the whole can be considered together but as an infinite body moved, and which must therefore be moved by something.
</p><p>
The same kind of answer holds good in respect of all effects and their causes in general. An infinite succession of effects will require an infinite efficient, or a cause infinitely effective. So far is it from requiring none.
</p><p>
Suppose a chain<a> hung down out of the heavens from an unknown height, and though every link of it gravitated toward the earth, and what it hung upon was not visible, yet it did not descend, but kept its situation; and upon this a question should arise, “What supported or kept up this chain”: would it be a sufficient answer to say, that the first (or lowest) link hung upon the second (or that next above it), the second or rather the first and second together upon the third, and so on <i xml:lang="la">ad infinitum</i>? For what holds up the whole? A chain of ten links would fall down, unless something able to bear it hindered: one of twenty, if not stayed by something of a yet greater strength, in proportion to the increase of weight: and therefore one of infinite links certainly, if not sustained by something infinitely strong, and capable to bear up an infinite weight. And thus it is in a chain of causes and effects<a> tending, or as it were gravitating, towards some end. The last (or lowest) depends, or (as one may say) is suspended upon the cause above it: this again, if it be not the first cause, is suspended as an effect upon something above it, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr><a> And if they should be infinite, unless (agreeably to what has been said) there is some cause upon which all hang or depend, they would be but an infinite effect without an efficient: and to assert there is any such thing, would be as great an absurdity, as to say, that a finite or little weight wants something to sustain it, but an infinite one or the greatest does not.
</p><p id="v2">
<b>II. A Cause or Being, that has in nature no superior cause, and therefore (by the terms) is also unproduced, and independent, must be self-existent} <abbr>i.e.</abbr> existence must be essential to him;</b> or, <b>such is his nature, that he cannot but be</b>.<a> For every being must either either exist of itself, or not of itself: that which exists not of itself must derive its existence from some other, and so be dependent: but the Being mentioned in the proposition is supposed to be independent, and uncaused. Therefore He must exist, not this way, but the other. The root of His existence can be sought for nowhere, but in His own nature: to place it anywhere else is to make a cause superior to the Supreme.
</p><p id="v3">
<b>III. There must be such a Being.</b> For (beside what has been said already) if there was not at least one such Being, nothing could be at all.<a> For the universe could not produce itself;<a> nor could any part of it produce itself, and then produce the rest: because this is supposing a thing to act before it is.
</p><p id="v4">
<b>IV. Such a Being, as is before described, must not only be eternal, but infinite.</b> Eternal He must be, because there is no way, by which such a Being can either begin or cease to be, existence being of His essence. And infinite He must be, because He can be limited by no other as to his existence. For if there was any being able to limit Him, He must be inferior to that being. He must also in that case be dependent: because he must be beholden to that being for his being what He is, and that He is not confined within narrower limits. Beside, if His presence (whatever the manner of it is) was anywhere excluded, He would not be there: and if not there, He might be supposed to be not elsewhere: and thus he might be supposed not to be at all. But such a Being, as is described in <a href="#v2">the II. proposition</a> cannot so much as be supposed not to be.
</p><p id="v5">
<b>V. Such a Being is above all things, that fall under our cognizance: and therefore his manner of existence is above all our conceptions.</b> For He is a necessary existent: but nothing within our comprehension is of this kind. We know no being, but what we can <em>imagine not to be</em> without any contradiction or repugnance to nature: nor do we know of any beside this Supreme being himself. For with respect to Him indeed we know, by reasoning, that there must be One being who cannot be supposed not to be; just as certainly as we know there is any thing at all: though we cannot know Him, and how he exists. Adequate ideas of eternity<a> and infinity are above us, us finites.<a>
</p><p>
In inquiring after the causes of things, when we find (or suppose) this to be the cause of that, another thing to be the cause of this again, and so on, if we can proceed, it may always be demanded with respect to the last cause that we can comprehend, “What is the cause of that?” So that it is not possible for us to terminate our inquiries of this kind but in something, which is to us incomprehensible. And therefore the Supreme cause must certainly be such.<a> But though it is impossible for us to have an adequate notion of his manner of exitence, yet we may be sure that,
</p><p id="v6">
<b>VI. He exists in a manner, which is perfect.</b> For He, who exists of himself, depends in no regard upon any other, and (as being a Supreme cause) is the fountain of existence to other beings, must exist: in the uppermost and best manner of existing. And not only so, but (since He is infinite and illimited) He must exist in the best manner illimitedly and infinitely. Now to exist thus is infinitely goodness of existence; and to exist in a manner infinitely good is to be perfect.
</p><p id="v7">
<b>VII. There can be but One such Being.</b><a> That is, as it appears by <a href="#v3">proposition III</a> that there must be at least one independent Being, such as is mentioned in <a href="#v1">proposition I</a> so now, that in reality there is <em>but One</em>.<a> Because his manner of existence being perfect and illimited, that manner of being (if I may speak so) is exhausted by Him, or belongs solely to Him.<a> If any other could partake with Him in it, He must want what that other had; be deficient and limited. Infinite and illimited enclose all.<a>
</p><p>
If there could be two Beings each by himself absolutely perfect, they must be either of the same, or of different natures. Of the same they cannot be; because thus, both being infinite, their exiitences would be concident: that is, they would be but the same or one. Nor can they be of different natures: because if their natures were opposite or contrary the one to the other, being equal (infinite both and everywhere meeting the one with the other), the one would just destroy or be the negation of the other:<a> and if they are supposed to be only different, not opposite, then if they differ as disparates, there must be some genus above them; which cannot be: and however they differ, they can only be said at most to be beings perfect in their respective kinds. But this is not to be absolutely perfect; it is only to be perfect in this or that respect: and to be only thus implies imperfection in other respects.
</p><p>
What has been here said is methinks sufficient to ruin the Manichean cause and exclude the independent principle of evil. For if we cannot account for the existence of that evil, which we find by experience to  in the world, it is but one instance out of many of our ignorance. There may be reasons for it, though we do not know them. And certainly no such experience must make us deny axioms or truths equally certain.<a> There are, beside, some things relating to this subject, which deserve our attention. For as to moral good and evil, they seem to depend upon ourselves.<a> If we do but endeavor, the most we can, to do what we ought, we shall not be guilty of not doing it (<a href="#sect4">Section IV</a>): and therefore it is our fault, and not to be charged upon any other being,<a> if guilt and evil be introduced by our neglect, or abuse of our own liberty and powers.<a> Then as to physical evil; without it much physical good would be lost, the one necessarily inferring the other.<a> Some things seem to be evil, which would nut appear to be such, if we could see through the whole contexture of things.<a> There are; not more evil than good things in the world, but surely more of the latter.<a> Many evils of this kind as well as of the former, come by our own fault; some perhaps by way of punishment; some of physic;<a> and some as the means to happiness, not otherwise to be obtained. And if there is a future state, that which seems to be wrong now may be rectified hereafter. To all which more may yet be added. As, that matter is not capable of perfection; and therefore where that is concerned, there must be imperfections, and consequently evils.<a> So that to ask, why God permits evil, is to ask, why he permits a material world, or such a being as man is;<a> endowed indeed with some noble faculties, but encumbered at the same time with bodily passions and propensions: Nay, I know not whether it be not to ask, why He permits any imperfect being; and that is, any being at all: which is a bold demand, and the answer to it lies perhaps too deep for us. If this world be designed for a <i xml:lang="grc">palæstra</i>, where men<a> are to esercise their faculties and their virtues, and by that prepare themselves for a superior state<a> (and who can say it is not?) there must be difficulties and temptations, occasions and opportunities for this exercise. Lastly, if there are evils, of which men know not the true origin; yet if they would but seriously reflect upon the many marks of reason, wisdom, and goodness everywhere to be observed in instances, which they do or may understand, they could scarce doubt but the same things prevailed in those, which they do not understand. If I should meet with a book, the author of which I found had disposed his matter in beautiful order, and treated his subjects with reason and exactness; but at last, as I read on, came to a few leaves written in a language which I did not know: in this case I should close the book with a full persuasion, that the same vein of good sense, which showed itself in the former and much greater part of it, ran through the other also: especially having arguments <i xml:lang="la">à priori</i>, which obliged me to believe, that the author of it all was the same person. ThisI should certainly do, rather than deny the force of those arguments, in order to assert two authors of the same book. But the evil principle has led me too far out of my way, therefore to return.
</p><p>
<b>VIII. All other beings depend upon that Being mentioned in the foregoing propositions for their existence.</b> For since there can be but one perfect and independent being, the rest must be imperfect and dependent: and since there is nothing else, upon which they can, ultimately, depend beside Him, upon Him they must and do depend.
</p><p>
<b>IX. He is therefore the Author of nature: nor can anything be, or be done, but what He either causes (immediately, or mediately), or permits.</b> All beings (by the last) depend upon Him for their existence: upon whom depends their existence, upon him also must depend the intrinsic manner of their existence, or the natures of these beings: and again upon whom depend their being and nature, upon Him depend the necessary effects and consequences of their being, and being such as they are in themselves. Then, as to the acts of such of them as may be free agents, and the effects of them, He is indeed <em>not</em> the Author of those; because by the terms and supposition they proceed from agents, who have no necessity imposed upon them by Him to act either this or that way. But yet however these free agents must depend upon Him as such: from Him they derive their power of acting: and it is He, who permits them to use their liberty; though many times, through their own fault, they use it amiss. And, lastly, as to the nature of those relations, which lie between ideas or things really existing, or which arise from facts already done and past, these result from the natures of the things themselves: all which the Supreme being either causes, or permits (as before). For since things can be but in one manner at once, and their mutual relations, ratios, agreements, disagreements, <abbr>etc.</abbr> are nothing but their manners of being with respect to each other, the natures of these relations will be determined by the natures of the things.
</p><p>
From hence now it appears, that whatever expresses the existences or non-existences of things, and their mutual relations as they are, is true by the constitution of nature: and if so, it must also be agreeable to His perfect comprehension of all truth, and to His will, who is at the head of it. Though the act of A (some free agent) is the effect of his liberty, and can only be said to be permitted by the Supreme being; yet when it is once done, the relation between the doer and the deed, the agreement there is between A and the idea of one who has committed such a fact, is a fixed relation. From thenceforward it will always be predicable of him, that he was the doer of it: and if any one should deny this, he would go counter to nature and that great Author of it, whole existence is now proved. And thus those arguments in <a href="#prop4">section I, proposition IV</a> which turned only upon a supposition that there was such a Being, are here confirmed and made absolute.
</p><p>
<b>X. The one supreme and perfect Being, upon whom the existence of all other being and their powers originally depend, is that Being, whom I mean by the word <em>God</em>.</b>
</p><p>
There are other truths still remaining in relation to the Deity, which we may know, and which are necessary to be known by us, if we would endeavor to demean ourselves toward Him according to truth and what He is. And they are such, as not only tend to rectify our opinions concerning His nature and attributes; but also may serve at the same time as further proof of His existence, and an amplification of some things touched perhaps too lightly. As,
</p><p>
<b>XI. God cannot be corporeal:</b> or, <b>there can be no corporeity in God.</b> There are many things in matter utterly inconsistent with the nature of such a Being, as it has been demonstrated God must be.
</p><p>
Matter exists in parts, every one of which, by the term, is imperfect:<a> but in a Being absolutely perfect there can be nothing that is imperfect.
</p><p>
These parts, though they are many times kept closely united by some occult influence, are in truth so many distinct bodies, which may, at least in our imagination, be disjoined or placed otherwise: nor can we have any idea of matter, which does not imply a natural discerpibility and susceptivity of various shapes and modifications: <abbr>i.e.</abr> mutability seems to be essential to it. But God, existing in a manner that is perfect, exists in a manner that must be uniform, always one and the same, and in nature unchangeable.
</p><p>
Matter is incapable of acting, passive only, and stupid: which are defects, that can never be ascribed to him who is the Firft cause or Prime agent, the Supreme intellect, and altogether perfect.
</p><p>
Then, if He is corporeal, whereever there is a vacuum, He must be excluded, and so becomes a a being bounded, finite, and as it were full of chasms.
</p><p>
Lastly, there is no matter or body, which may not be supposed not to be; whereas the idea of God, or that Being upon whom all others depend, involves in it existence.
</p><p>
<b>XII. Neither infinite space, nor infinite duration, nor matter infinitely extended, or eternally existing, nor any, nor all of these taken together, can be God.</b><a> For,
</p><p>
Space taken separately from the things, which possess and fill it, is but an empty scene or vacuum: and to say, that infinite space is God, or that God is infinite space, is to say that He is an infinite vacuum: than which nothing can be more absurd, or blasphemous. How can space, which is but a vast void, rather the negation of all things, than positively anything, a kind of diffused nothing; how can, this, I say, be the First cause, <abbr>etc.</abbr> or indeed any cause? What attributes beside penetrability and extension, what excellencies, what perfections is it capable of?<a>
</p><p>
As infinite space cannot be God, though He be excluded from no place or space; so though He is eternal, yet eternity or infinite duration itself is not God.<a> For duration, abstracted from all durables, is nothing actually existing by itself: it is the duration of a being, not a being.
</p><p>
Infinite space and duration, taken together, cannot be God: because an interminable space of infinite duration is still nothing but eternal space; and that is at most but an eternal vacuum.
</p><p>
Since it has been already proved, that corporeity is inconsistent with Divine perfection, though matter should be infinitely extended, or there should be an infinite quantity of it, yet still whereever it is, it carries this inconsistence along with it.
</p><p>
If to matter be added infinite duration, neither does this alter the nature of it. This only supposes it to be eternally what it is, <abbr>i.e.</abbr> eternally incapable of Divine perfection.
</p><p>
And if to it you add the ideas of both infinite extension (or space) and duration too; yet still, so long as matter is matter, it must always and everywhere be incapable of Divinity.
</p><p>
Lastly, not the universe or sum total of finite beings, can be God. For if it is, then everything is divine, everything God, or of God; and so all things together must make but one being.<a> But the contrary to this we see, there being evidently many beings distinct, and separable one from another, and independent each of other. Nay, this distinction and separation of existence, beside what we see without us, we may even feel within ourselves. We are severally conscious to ourselves of the individuation and distinction of our own minds from all other: nor is there anything, of which we can be more certain. Were we all the same being, and had one mind, as in that case we must have, thoughts could not be private, or the peculiar thoughts of any one person; but they must be common acts of the whole mind, and there could be but one conscience common to us all.<a> Beside, if all things conjunctly are God or the Perfect being (I dread the mention of such things, though it be in order to refute them), how comes this remarkable instance of imperfection, among many others, to cleave to us, that we should not know even ourselves, and what we are?<a> In short, no collection of beings can be one being; and therefore not God. And the universe itself is but a collection of distinct beings.<a>
</p><p>
<b>XIII. It is so far from being true that God is corporeal, that there could be no such thing as either matter or motion, if there was not some Superior being, upon whom they depended.</b> Or, <b>God is such a being, that without Him there could be neither matter nor motion.</b> This must be true of matter: because it has been proved already, that there can be but one independent being; that he is incorporeal; and that the existence of all other beings must depend upon Him. But the same thing may be proved otherwise. If matter (I mean the existence of it) does not depend upon something above it, it must be an independent being; and if an independent being, a necessary being; and then there could be no such thing as a vacuum: but all bodies must be perfectly solid; and, more than that, the whole world could be but one such body, five times as firm as brass, and incapable of all motion. For that being which exists necessarily does necessarily exist: that is, it cannot not exist. But in a vacuum matter does not exist.
</p><p>
Moreover, if matter be an independent, necessary being, and exists of itself, this must be true of every particle of it: and if so, there could not only be no vacuum but every particle must be everywhere. For it could not be limited to occupy only a place of such certain dimensions by its own nature; since this confinement of existence within certain bounds implies non-existence in other places beyond those bounds, and is equal to a negation of existence; and when existence is essential to any being, a negation of existence cannot be so. Nor, in the next place, could its existence be limited by anything else, because it is supposed to have its existence only of itself; <abbr>i.e.</abbr> to have a principle of existence in itself, or to have an existence that is not dependent upon or obnoxious to any other.
</p><p>
And I may add still, if matter be self-existent, I do not see, not only how it comes to be restrained to a place of some certain capacity, but also how it comes to be limited in other respects; or why it should not exist in a manner that is in all respects perfect. So that thus it appears, matter must derive its existence from some other being, who causes it to be just what it is. And the being, who can do this, must be God.
</p><p>
It is to no purpose to object here, that one cannot conceive, how the existence of matter can be derived from another being. For God being above our conceptions, the manner in which He operates, and in which things depend upon him, must also be inconceivable. Reason discovers, that this visible world must owe its existence to some invisible Almighty being; <abbr>i.e.</abbr> it discovers this to be fact, and we must not deny facts because we know not <em>how</em> they are effected. It is far from being new, that our faculties should disclose to us the existence of things, and then drop us in our inquiry <em>how</em> they are. Thus much for matter.
</p><p id="motion">
As for motion; without a First cause, such as has been described, there could be none: and much less such motions as we see in the world. This may be immediately deduced from the foregoing paragraphs. For if matter itself could not be without such a cause, it is certain motion, which is an affection of matter, could never be.
</p><p>
But further, there could be no motion, unless either there be in matter itself a power of beginning it; or it is communicated from body to body in an infinite succession, or in a circle, and so has no beginning; or else is produced by some incorporeal being, or beings. Now as hardy as men are in advancing opinions that favor their vices, though never so repugnant to reason, I can hardly believe anyone will assert, that a parcel of mere matter (let it be great or small, of any figure whatsoever, <abbr>etc.</abbr>) left altogether to itself, could ever of itself begin to move. If there is any such bold assertor, let him fix his eyes upon some lump of matter, <abbr>e.g.</abbr> a stone, piece of timber, or a clod (cleared of all animals), and peruse it well; and then ask himself seriously, whether it is possible for him in earnest to believe, that that stone, log, or clod, though nothing corporeal or incorporeal should excite or meddle with it, might some time or other of itself begin to creep. However, to be short, a power of beginning motion is not in the idea of matter. It is passive, as we see, to the impressions of motion, and susceptive of it; but cannot produce it. On the contrary, it will always persist uniformly in its present state, either of rest or motion, if nothing stirs, diverts, accelerates, or stops it. Nor is there any thing in all physics better settled than that, which is called <i xml:lang="la">vis inertiæ</i> or the inertia of matter.
</p><p>
The propagation of motion from body to body, without any First mover, or immaterial cause of motion, has been proved impossible, <a href="#v1">proposition I</a>.
</p><p>
The supposition of a perpetual motion in a circle is begging the question. For if A moves B, B moves C, and soon to Z, and then Z moves A; this is the same as to say, that A moves A, by the intervention of B, C, D, … Z: that is, A moves itself, or can begin motion.</a>
</p><p>
It remains then, that all corporeal motions come originally from some mover incorporeal: which must be either that Supreme and self-existing spirit himself, who is God; or such, as will put us into the way how to find, that there is such a Being <a href="#v1">(turn back to proposition I)</a>.
</p><p>
If we consider ourselves, and the voluntary motions begun by us, we may there see the thing exemplified. We move our bodies or some members of them, and by these move other things, as they again do others; and know these motions to spring from the operations of our minds: but then we know also, that we have not an independent power of creating motion. If we had, it could not be so limited as our locomotive faculties are, nor confined to small quantities and certain circumstances only: we should have had it from eternity, nor could we ever be deprived of it. So that we are necessitated to look up and acknowledge some Higher being, who is able not only to produce motion, but to impart a faculty of producing it.
</p><p>
And if the petty motions of us mortals afford arguments for the being of a God, much more may those greater motions we see in the world, and the phenomena attending them: I mean the motions of the planets and heavenly bodies. For these must be put into motion, either by one common mighty Mover, acting upon them immediately, or by causes and laws of His appointment; or by their respective movers, who, for reasons to which you can by this time be no stranger, must depend upon some Superior, that furnish them with the power of doing this. And granting it to be done either of these ways, we can be at no great distance from a demonstration of the existence of a Deity.
</p><p>
It may perhaps be said, that though matter has not the power of moving itself, yet it has an attractive force, by which it can move other parts of matter: so that all matter equally moves and is moved. But, allowing those things which are now usually ascribed to attraction, we shall still be necessitated to own some Superior being, whose influence mixes itself with matter, and operates upon it; or at least who, some way or other, imparts this force. For attraction, according to the true sense of the word, supposes one body to act upon another at a distance, or where it is not; but nothing can be an agent, where it is not at all. Matter can act only by contact, impelling contiguous bodies, when it is put into motion by something else, or resisting those which strike against it, when it is at rest. And this it does as matter; <abbr>i.e.</abbr> by being impenetrable to other matter: but attraction is not of the nature or idea of matter. So that what is called attraction, is so called only because the same things happen, as if the parts of matter did mutually attract: but in truth this can only be an effect of something, which acts upon or by matter according to a certain law. The parts of matter seem not only to gravitate towards each other, but many of them to fly each other. Now these two contrary motions and seeming qualities cannont both proceed from matter <i xml:lang="la">quà</i> matter; cannot both be of the nature of it: and therefore they must be owing to some external cause, or to some other being, which excites in them this, as it were love and discord.<a>
</p><p>
Beside, as to the revolution of a planet about the sun, mere gravitation is not sufficient to produce that effect. It must be compounded with a motion of projection, to keep the planet from falling directly into the sun, and bring it about: and from what hand, I desire to know, comes this other motion (or direction)? Who impressed it?
</p><p>
What a vast field for contemplation is here opened! Such regions of matter about us, in which there is not the least particle that does not carry with it an argument of God’s existence; not the least stick or straw, or other trifle that falls to the ground, but shows it; not the slightest motion produced, the least whisper of the air, but tells it.
</p><p>
<b>XIV. The frame and constitution of the world, the magnificence of it, the various phenomena and kinds of beings, the uniformity observed in the productions of things, the uses and ends for which they serve, <abbr>etc.</abbr> do all show that there is some Almighty designer, an infinite wisdom and power at the top of all these things: such marks there are of both.</b><a> or, <b>God is that Being, without whom such a frame or constitution of the world, such a magnificence in it, <abbr>etc.</abbr> could not be.</b> In order to prove to anyone the grandness of this fabric of the world, one needs only to bid him consider the sun with that insupportable glory and lustre that surrounds it: to demonstrate the vast distance, magnitude, and heat of it: to represent to him the chorus of planets moving periodically, by uniform laws, in their several orb;its about it; affording a regular variety of aspects; guarded some of them by secondary planets, and as it were emulating the state of the sun; and probably all possessed by proper inhabitants: to remind him of those surprising visits the comets make us; the large trains, or uncommon splendor, which attends them; the far country they come from; and the curiosity and horror they excite not only among us, but in the inhabitants of other planets, who also may be up to see the entry and progress of these ministers of fate:<a> to direct his eye and contemplation, through those azure fields and vast regions above him, up to the fixed stars, that radiant numberless host of heaven; and to make him understand, how unlikely a thing it is, that they should be placed there only to adorn and bespangle a canopy over our heads (though that would be a great piece of magnificence too), and much less to supply the places of so many glow-worms, by affording a feeble light to our earth, or even to all our fellow-planets: to convince him, that they are rather so many other suns, with their several regions and sets of planets about them: to show him, by the help of glasses, still more and more of these fixed lights, and to beget in him an apprehension of their unaccountable numbers, and of those immense spaces, that lie retired beyond our utmost reach and even imagination: I say, one needs but to do this, and explain to him such things as are now known almost to everybody; and by it to show that if the world be not infinite, it is <i xml:lang="la">infinito similis</i>;<a> and therefore sure a magnificent structure, and the work of an infinite Architect. But if we could take a view of all the particulars contained within that astonishing compass, which we have thus hastily run over, how would wonders multiply upon us? Every corner, every part of the world is as it were made up of other worlds. If we look upon this our seat (I mean this earth), what scope is here for admiration? The great variety of mountains, hills, valleys, plains, rivers, seas, trees, plants! The many tribes of different animals, with which it is flocked! The multifarious inventions and works of one of these; that is, of us men, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> And yet when all these (heaven and earth) are surveyed as nicely as they can be by the help of our unassisted senses, and evcn of telescopical glasses, by the assistance of good microscopes in very small parts of matter as many new wonders<a> may perhaps be discovered, as those already observed; new kingdoms of animals; new architecture and curiosity of work. So that as before our senses and even conception fainted in those vast journeys we were obliged to take in considering the expanse of the universe; so here again they fail us in our researches into the principles and consistuent parts of it. Both the beginnings and the ends of things, the least and the greatest, all conspire to baffle us: and which way ever we prosecute our inquiries, we still fall in with fresh subjects of amazement, and fresh reasons to believe that there are indefinitely still more and more behind, that will forever escape our eagerest pursuits and deepest penetration.
</p><p>
This mighty building is not only thus grand, and the appearances stupendous in it, but the manner in which things are effected is commonly unintelligible, and their causes too profound for us. There are indeed many things in nature, which we know; and some, of which we seem to know the causes: but, alas! how few are these with respect to the whole sum? And the causes which we assign, what are they? Commonly such, as can only be expressed in general terms, while the bottoms of things remain unfathomable. Such, as have been collected from experience, but could scarcely be known beforehand, by any arguments <i xml:lang="la">à priori</i>, to be capable of rendering such effects: and yet till causes are known after that manner, they are not thoroughly understood. Such, as seem disproportionate and too little, and are so insufficient and unsatisfactory, that one cannot but be inclined to think, that something immaterial and invisible must be immediately concerned. In short, we know many times, that such a thing will have such an effect, or perhaps that such an effect is produced by such a cause, but the manner <em>how</em> we know not; or but grossly, and if such an hypothesis be true. It is impossible for us to come at the true principles of things, or to see into the economy of the finest part of nature and workings of the first springs. The causes that appear to us, are but effects of other causes; the vessels, of which the bodies of plants and animals consist, are made up of other, smaller vessels: the subtlest parts of matter, which we have any notion of (as animal spirits, or particles of light), have their parts, and may for ought we know be compound bodies: and as to the substances themselves of all these things, and their internal constitution, they are hid from our eyes. Our philosophy dwells in the surface of nature.
</p><p>
However, in the next place, we ourselves cannot but be witnesses, that there are stated methods, as so many set forms of proceeding, which things punctually and religiously keep to. The same causes, circumstanced in the same manner, have always the same success: all the species of animals, among us, are made according to one general idea; and so are those of plants also, and even minerals: no new ones are brought forth or arisen anywhere: and the old are preserved and continued by the old ways.
</p><p>
Lastly, it appears I think plainly enough in the parts and model of the world, that there is a contrivance and a respect to certain reasons and ends. How the sun is posited near the middle of our system for the more convenient dispensing of his benign influences to the planets moving about him; how the plain of the earth’s equator intersects that of her orbit, and makes a proper angle with it, in order to diversify the year, and create a useful variety of seasons, and many other things of this kind, though a thousand times repeated, will always be pleasing meditations to good men and true scholars. Who can observe the vapors to ascend, especially from the sea, meet above in clouds, and fall again after condensation, and not understand this to be a kind of distillation in order to clear the water of its grosser salts, and then by rains and dews to supply the fountains and rivers with fresh and wholesome liquor; to nourish the vegetables below by showers, which descend in drops as from a watering-pot upon a garden, <abbr>etc.</abbr> who can view the structure of a plant or animal; the indefinite number of their fibers and fine vessels, the formation of larger vessels and the several members out of them, and the apt disposition of all these; the way laid out for the reception and distribution of nutriment; the effect this nutriment has in extending the vessels, bringing the vegetable or animal to its full growth and expansion, continuing the motion of the several fluids, repairing the decays of the body, and preserving life: who can take notice of the several faculties of animals, their arts of saving and providing for themselves, or the ways in which they are provided for; the uses of plants to animals, and of some animals to others, particularly to mankind; the care taken that the several species should be propagated out of their proper seeds (without confusion),<a> the strong inclinations implanted in animals for that purpose, their love of their young, and the like: I say, who can do this, and not see a <em>design</em>, in such regular pieces, so nicely wrought, and so preserved? If there was but one animal, and in that case it could not be doubted but that his eyes were made that he might see with them, his ears that he might hear with them and so on, through at least the most considerable parts of him; if it can much less be doubted, when the same things are repeated in the individuals of all the tribes of animals; if the like observations may be made with respect to vegetables, and other things: and if all these kinds of things, and therefore much more their particulars, upon and in the earth, waters, air, are inconceivably numerous (as most evidently they are), one cannot but be convinced from that, which is so very obvious to every understanding, and plainly runs through the nobler parts of the visible world, that not only they, but other things, even those that seem to be less noble, have their ends too, though not so well understood.
</p><p>
And now since we cannot suppose the parts of matter to have contrived this wonderful form of a world among themselves, and then by agreement to have taken their respective posts, and pursued constant ends by certain methods and measures concerted (because these are acts, of which they are not capable), there must be some other Being, whose wisdom and power are equal to such a mighty work, as is the structure and preservation of the world. There must be some almighty Mind, who models and adorns it; lays the causes of things so deep; prescribes them, such uniform and steady laws; destines and adapts them to certain purposes; and makes one thing to fit and answer to another.<a>
</p><p>
That such a beautiful scheme, such a just and geometrical arrangement of things, composed, of innumerable parts, and placed as the offices and uses and wants of the several beings require, through such an immense extent, should be the effect of <em>chance</em> only, is a conceit, so prodigiously absurd, that certainly no one can espouse it heartily, who understands the meaning of that word. Chance seems to be only a term, by which we express our ignorance of the cause of anything. For when we say any thing comes “by chance,” we do not mean, that it had no other cause; but only, that we do not know the true cause, which produced it, or interposed in such a manner, as to make that fall out which was not expected. Nor can I think, that anybody has such an idea of chance, as to make it an agent or really existing and acting cause of anything, and much less sure of all things. Whatever events or effects there are, they must proceed from some agent or cause, which is either free or not free (that is, necessary). If it be free, it wills what it produces: and therefore that which is produced is produced with design, not by chance. If it acts necessarily, the event must necessarily be, and therefore it is not by accident. For that, which is by accident or chance only, might not have been; or it is an accident only, that it is. There can be therefore no such cause as chance. And to omit a great deal that might yet be said, matter is indefinitely divisible, and the first particles (or atoms) of which it consists must be small beyond all our apprehension; and the chances, that must all hit to produce one individual of any species of material beings (if only chance was concerned), must consequently be indefinitely many: and if space be also indefinitely extended, and the number of those individuals (not to say of the species themselves) which lie dispersed in it indefinite, the chances required to the production of them all, or of the universe, will be the rectangle of one indefinite quantity drawn into another. We may well call them infinite. And then to say, that any thing cannot happen, unless infinite chances coincide, is the same as to say, there are infinite chances against the happening of it, or odds that it will not happen: and this again is the same as to say, it is impossible to happen; since if there be a possibility that it may happen, the hazard is not infinite. The world therefore cannot be the child of chance.<a> He must be little acquainted with the works of nature, who is not sensible how delicate and fine they are: and the finer they are, the grosser were those of Epicurus.<a>
</p><p>
If it should be objected, that many things seem to be useless, many births are monstrous, or the like, such answers as these may be made. The uses of some things are known to some men, and not to others: the uses of some are known now, that were not known to anybody formerly: the uses of many may be discovered hereafter: and those of some other things may forever remain unknown to all men, and yet be in nature, as much as those discovered were before their discovery, or are now in respect of them who know them not. Things have not therefore no uses, because they are concealed from us. Nor is nature irregular, or without method, because there are some seeming deviations from the common rule. These are generally the effects of that influence, which free agents and various circumstances have upon natural productions, which may be deformed, or hurt by external impressions; heterogeneous matter introduced, or disagreeable and unnatural motions excited: and if the case could be truly put, it would no doubt appear, that nature proceeds as regularly (or the laws of nature have as regular an effect), when a monster is produced, as when the usual issue in common cases. Under these circumstances the monster is the genuine issue: that is, in the same circumstances there would always be the same kind of production. And therefore if things are now and then misshaped, this infers no unsteadiness or mistake in nature. Beside, the magnificence of the world admits of some perturbations; not to say, requires some variety. The question is, Could all those things, which we do know to have uses and ends, and to the production of which such wonderful contrivance and the combinations of so many things are required, be produced, and method and regularity be preserved so far as it is, if nothing but blind chance presided over all? Are not the innumerable instances of things, which are undeniably made with reference to certain ends, and of those which are propagated and repeated by the same constant methods, enough to convince us, that there are ends proposed, and rules observed, even where we do not see them. And, lastly, if we should descend to particulars, what are those seemingly useless or monstrous productions in respect of the rest, that plainly declare the ends, for which they were intended, and that come into the world by the usual ways, with the usual perfection of their several kinds? If the comparison could be made, I verily believe these would be found to be almost infinituple of the other; which ought therefore to be reputed as nothing.
</p><p>
They, who content themselves with words, may ascribe the formation of the world to fate or nature, as well as to chance, or better. And yet fate, in the first place, is nothing but a series of events, considered as necessarily following in some certain order; or, of which it has always been true, that they <em>would be</em> in their determinate times and places. It is called indeed a series of causes:<a> but then they are such causes as are also effects, all of them, if there is no First cause; and may be taken for such. So that in this description is nothing like such a cause, as is capable of giving this form to the world. A series of events is the same with events happening <i xml:lang="la">seriatim</i>: which words declare nothing concerning the <em>cause</em> of that concatenation of events, or why it is. Time, place, manner, necessity are but circumstances of things that come to pass; not causes of their existence, or of their being as they are. On the contrary, some external and superior cause must be supposed to put the series in motion, to project the order, to connect the causes and effects, and to <em>impose</em> the necessity.<a>
</p><p>
Then for nature, 1. If it be used for the intrinsic manner of existing; that constitution, make, or disposition, with which anything is produced or born, and from which result those properties, powers, inclinations, passions, qualities, and manners, which are called natural (and sometimes “nature”), in opposition to such as are acquired, adventitious, or forced (which use is common): then to say, that nature formed anything, or gave it its manner of existence, is to say, that it formed itself, or that the effect is the efficient.<a> Beside, how can manner (manner of existing) be the cause of existing, or properly do anything. An agent is an acting being, some substance, not a <em>manner</em> of being. 2. If it be used in that other sense, by which it stands for the ideas of things, what they are in themselves, and what in their circumstances, causes, consequences, respects; or, in short, that which determines them to be of this or that kind (as when we say, the <em>nature</em> of justice<a> requires this or that; <abbr>i.e.</abbr> the idea of justice requires or supposes it: a crime is of such a <em>nature</em>; that is, bears such a respect to the law, and is attended with such circumstances, or the like): then none of these senses can do an atheist any service. 3. If it be used for the <em>world</em><a> (as, the laws of <em>nature</em> may be understood to be the laws of the world, by which it is governed, and the phenomena in it produced; after the same manner of speaking as when we say, the laws of England, France, <abbr>etc.</abbr>) then it stands for that very thing, the former and architect of which is the object of our inquiry; and therefore cannot be that architect itself. Under this sense may be comprehended that, when it denotes <em>reality of existence</em>, as when it is said that such a thing is not in <em>nature</em> (not to be found in the world). 4. If it signifies the forementioned laws themselves; or that course, in which things by virtue of these laws proceed (as when the effects of these laws are styled the works of <em>nature</em>): then, laws suppose some legislator, and are posterior to that of which they are the laws. There can be no laws of any nation, till the people are of which that nation consists. 5. If it be used after the same manner as the word “habit” frequently is; to which many things are ascribed (just as they are to nature), though it be nothing existing distinct from the habits, which particular men or beings contract: then nature is a kind of abstract notion, which can do nothing. Perhaps “nature” may be put for <em>natures</em>, all natures, after the manner of a collective noun; or it may be mentioned as an <em>agent</em>, only as we personify virtues and attributes, either for variety, or the shorter and more convenient expressing of things. Lastly, if it denotes the Author of nature, or God<a> (the effect seeming, though by a hard metonymy in this case, to be put for the efficient): then, to Him it is that I ascribe the formation of the world, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> To all which I must subjoin, that there is an unaccountable liberty taken in the use of this word: and that frequently it is used merely as a word, and nothing more, they who use it not knowing themselves, what they mean by it.<a>  However, in no sense can it supersede the being of a Deity.
</p><p>
<b>XV. Life, sense, agitation, and the faculties of our own minds show the existence of some superior Being, from whom they are derived,</b> Or, <b>God is that Beiizg, without whom neither could these be, any more than the things before mentioned</b>. That they cannot flow from the nature of any matter about us as matter, or from any modification, size, or motion of it, if it be not already apparent, may perhaps be proved more fully afterwards. And that our souls themselves are not self-existent, nor hold their faculties independently of all other beings, follows from propositions <a href="#v4">IV</a> and <a href="#v7">VII</a> Therefore we must necessarily be indebted for what we have of this kind to some great Benefactor, who is the fountain of them. For since we are conscious, that we have them, and yet have them not of ourselves, we must have them from some other.
</p><p>
A man has little reason, God knows, to fancy the suppositum of his life, sense, and cogitative faculties to be an independent being, when he considers how transitory and uncertain at best his life and all his enjoyments are; what he is, whence he came, and whither he is going.<a> The mind acts not, or in the most imperceptible manner <i xml:lang="la">in animalculo</i>, or the seminal state of a man; only as a principle of vegetation in the state of an embryon, and as a sensitive soul in the state of infancy, at least for some time, in which we are rather below, than above, many other animals. By degrees indeed, with age and exercise and proper opportunities, it seems to open itself, find its own talents, and ripen into a rational being. But then it reasons not without labor, and is forced to take many tedious steps in the pursuit of truth; finds all its powers subject to great eclipses and diminutions, in the time of sleep, indisposition, sickness, <abbr>etc.</abbr> and at best reaching but a few objects in respect of all, that are in the immensity of the universe; and, lastly, is obnoxious to many painful sensations and reflections. Had the soul of man the principle of its own existence and faculties within itself, clear of all dependence, it could not be liable to all these limitations and defects, to all these alterations and removes from one state to another: it must certainly be constant to itself, and persist in a uniform manner of being.
</p><p>
There may be perhaps who will say, that the soul, together with life, sense, <abbr>etc.</abbr> are propagated by traduction from parents to children, from them to their children again, and so from eternity:<a> and that therefore nothing can be collected from the nature of them as to the existence of a Deity. Answer: if there could be such a traduction, yet to suppose one traduced to come from another traduced, and so <i xml:lang="la">ab æterno</i>, without any further account of the original of mankind, or taking in any author of this traductive power, is the same as to suppose an infinite series of moveds without a mover, or of effects without a cause: the absurdity of which is shown already, <a href="#v1">proposition I</a>. But concerning this matter I cannot but think, further, after the following manner. What is meant by <i xml:lang="la">tradux animæ</i> ought to be clearly explained: for it is not easy to conceive how thought, or thinking substances, can be propagated after the manner of branches, or in any manner that can be analogous to it, or even warrant a metaphorical use of that phrase.<a> It should also be told, whether this traduction be made from one or from both the parents. If from one, from which of them is it? And if from both, then the same <i xml:lang="la">tradux</i> or branch must always proceed from two stocks: which is a thing, I presume, that can nowhere else be found, nor has any parallel in nature. And yet such a thing may much better be supposed of vines, or plants, than of thinking beings, who are simple and uncompounded substances.<a>
</p><p>
This opinion of the traduction of souls seems to me to stand upon an unsound foundation. For I take it to be grounded chiefly on these two things: the similitude there is betweenthe features, humors, and abilities of children and those of their parents,<a> and the difficulty men find in forming the notion of a spirit.<a> For from hence they are apt to conclude, that there can be no other substance but matter: and that the soul resulting from some disposition of the body, or some part of it, or being some merely material appendix to it, must attend it, and come along with it from the parent or parents; and as there is a derivation of the one, so there must be also of the other at the same time.
</p><p>
Now the former of these is not always true; as it ought to be, to make the argument valid. Nothing more common than to see children differ from their parents, in their understandings, inclinations, shapes, complexions, and (I am sure) one from another. And this dissimilitude has as much force to prove there is not a traduction, as similitude, whenever that happens, can have to prove there is. Besides, it seems to me not hard to account for some likeness without the help of traduction. It is visible the meat and drink men take, the air they breathe, the objects they see, the sounds they hear, the company they keep, <abbr>etc.</abbr> will create changes in them, sometimes with respect to their intellectuals, sometimes to their passions and humors, and sometimes to their health and other circumstances of their bodies: and yet the original stamina and fundamental parts of the man remain still the same. If then the <i xml:lang="la">semina</i>, out of which animals are produced, are (as I doubt not) <i xml:lang="la">animalcula</i> already formed;<a> which being distributed about, especially in some opportune places, are taken in with aliment, or perhaps the very air; being separated in the bodies of the males by strainers proper to every kind, and then lodged in their seminal vessels, do there receive some kind of addition and influence; and being thence transferred into the wombs of the females, are there nourished more plentifully, and grow, till they become too big to be longer confined:<a> I say, if this be the case, why may not the nutriment received from the parents, being prepared by their vessels, and of the same kind with that with which they themselves are nourished, be the same in great measure to the <i xml:lang="la">animalcula</i> and <i xml:lang="la">embrya</i> that it is to them, and consequently very much assimilate their young, without the derivation of anything else from them? Many impressions may be made upon the <i xml:lang="la">feœtus</i>, and many tinctures given to the fluids communicated to it from the parents; and yet it, the animal itself, may not be originally begun in them, or traduced from them. This hypothesis (which has long been mine) suggests a reason, why the child is sometimes more like the father, sometimes the mother; <abbr xml:lang="la">viz.</abbr> because the vessels of the animalculum are disposed to receive a greater proportion of aliment sometimes from the one, sometimes from the other: or the fluids and spirits in one may ferment and operate more strongly than in the other, and so have a greater and more signal effect. (Here it ought to be observed, that though what the animalculum receives from the father, is in quantity little in respect of all that nutriment, which it receives by the mother; yet the former, being the first accretion to the original stamina, adhering immediately, and being early interwoven with them, may affect it more.)
</p><p>
Since there cannot be a proper traduction of the child (one mind, and one body) from both the <em>two</em> parents, all the similitude it bears to one of them must proceed from some such cause as I have assigned, or at least not from traduction. For the child being sometimes like the father, and sometimes the mother, and the traduction either always from the father, or always from the mother, there must sometimes be similitude, where there is no traduction: and then if the child may resemble one of them without it, why not the other too? The account I have given, appears, many times at least, to be true in plants, which raised from the same seed, but in different beds and soil, will differ. The different nutriment introduces some diversity into the seed or original plant, and assimilates it in some measure to the rest raised in the same place.
</p><p>
The other thing, which I take to be one of the principal supports to this doctrine of traduction (a supposition, that the soul is merely material, or but the result of some disposition in matter) has been undertaken to be refuted hereafter. But I may premise this here: though we can have no image of a spirit (because no being can be portrayed or represented by an image, but what is material), yet we may have reason to assert the existence of such a substance.<a> Matter is a thing, which we converse with, of which we know pretty well the nature, and properties; and since we cannot find among them any that are cogitative, or such a thing as life, but several things <em>inconsistent</em> with them, we are under a necessity of confessing that there is some other species of substance beside that which is corporeal, and that our souls are of that kind (or rather of one of those kinds, which are not merely corporeal: for there must be more than one), though we can draw no image of it in our own minds. Nor is it at all surprising, that we should not be able to do this: for how can the mind be the object of itself?<a> It may contemplate the body which it inhabits, may be conscious of its own acts, and reflect upon the ideas it finds: but of its own substance it can have no adequate notion, unless it could be as it were object and spectator both. Only that perfect Being, whose knowledge is infinite, can thus intimately know himself.
</p><p>
They, who found the traduction of the soul upon this presumption, that it is material, and attends the body as some part or affection of it, seem further to be most woefully mistaken upon this account: because the body itself is not propagated by traduction. It passes indeed <em>through</em> the bodies of the parents, who afford a transitory habitation and subsistence to it: but it cannot be <em>formed by</em> the parents, or <em>grow out</em> of any part of them. For all the vital and essential parts of it must be one coeval system, and formed at once in the first article of the nascent animalculum; since no one of these could be nourished, or ever come to anything, without the rest: on the contrary, if any one of them could prevent and be before the rest, it would soon wither and decay again for lack of nourishment received by proper vessels; as we see the limbs and organs of animals do, when the supply due from the animal œconomy is any way intercepted or obstructed. And since an organized body, which requires to be thus simultaneously made (fashioned as it were at one stroke) cannot be the effect of any natural and gradual process, I cannot but conclude, that there were animalcula of every tribe originally formed by the almighty Parent, to be the seed of all future generations of animals. Any other manner of production would be like that, which is usually called equivocal or spontaneous generation, and with great reason now generally exploded. And it is certain, that the analogy of nature in other instances, and microscopical observations do abet what I have said strongly.
</p><p>
Lastly, if there is no race of men that has been from eternity, there is no man who is not descended from two first parents: and then the souls of those two first parents could be traduced from no other. And that there is no such race (none that has been upon this earth from eternity), is apparent from the face of earthly things, and the history of mankind,<a> arts, and sciences. What is objected against this argument from fancied inundations, conflagrations, <abbr>etc.</abbr><a> has no weight with me. Let us suppose some such great calamity to happen now. It must be either universal, or not. If universal, so that nobody at all could be saved, then either there must never be any more men, or they must begin again in some first parents. If it was only topical, affecting some one tract of the globe, or if the tops of mountains more eminent, or rocks more firm remained unaffected, or if there were any natural means left by which men might escape, considerable numbers must certainly survive: and then it cannot be imagined, that they should all be absolutely so ignorant of everything, that no one should be able to give an account of such things as were common; no one able to write, or read, or even to recollect that there were such things as letters; none, that understood any trade; none, that could tell what kind of habitations they had, how they used to be clothed, how their meat dressed, or even what their food was: nor can it be thought, that all books, arms, manufactures of every kind, ships, buildings, and all the product of human skill and industry now extant in the world should be so universally and utterly abolished, that no part, no vestigium of them should remain; not so much, as to give a hint toward the speedy restoration of necessary arts at least. The people escaping must sure have clothes on, and many necessaries about them, without which they could not escape, nor outlive such a dreadful scene. In short, no conflagration, no flood, no destruction, can serve the objector’s purpose, to reduce mankind to that state, which by ancient memoirs and many undeniable symptoms we find them to have been in not many thousands of years since; I say, no destruction can serve his purpose, but such an one as makes thorough work, only sparing two or three couples, stripped of every thing and the most stupid and veriest blocks<a> to be picked out of the whole number: natural fools, or mere <i xml:lang="la">homines sylvestres</i> would retain habits, and fall to their old way of living, as soon as they had the opportunity to do it. And suppose they never should have such an opportunity; yet neither would this serve him effectually: since without some supernatural Power interposing, such a revolution could not be brought about, nor the naked creatures preserved, nor the earth reformed out of its ashes and ruins after such a calcination, or dissolution, such a total demolition of everything. To this give me leave to add, that though many inundations, great earthquakes, volcanos, and fiery eruptions have been in particular countries; yet there is no memory or testimony of any such thing, that has ever been universal,<a> except perhaps of one deluge: and as to that, if the genius of the language in which the relation is delivered, and the manner of writing history in it were well understood, some labored and moliminous attempts to account for it might have been prevented. And beside that, the same record, which tells the thing was, tells also how immediately God was concerned in it; that some persons actually were saved; and that the people who then perished, as well as they who survived, all descended from two first parents: and if that authority be a sufficient proof of one part of the relation, it must be so of the reft
</p><p>
We may conclude then, that the human soul with its faculties of cogitation, <abbr>etc.</abbr> depends upon a Superior being. And who can this be but the Supreme being, or God? Of whom I now proceed to affirm, in the next place, that,
</p><p>
<b>XVI. Though His essence and manner of being is to us altogether incomprehensible, yet we may say with assurance, that He is free from all defects: or One, from whom all defects must be removed.</b>
</p><p>
This proposition has in effect been proved already.<a> However I will take the liberty to enlarge a little further upon it here. As our minds are finite, they cannot without a contradiction comprehend what is infinite. And if they were enlarged to ever so great a capacity, yet so long as they retain their general nature, and continue to be of the same kind, they would by that be only rendered able to apprehend more and more finite ideas; out of which, howsoever increased or exalted, no positive idea of the perfection of God can ever be formed. For a Perfect being must be infinite, and perfectly One: and in such a nature there can be nothing finite, nor any composition of finites.
</p><p>
How should we comprehend the nature of the Supreme incorporeal being, or how He exists, when we comprehend not the nature of the most inferior spirits, nor have any conception even of matter itself divested of its accidents? How should we attain to an adequate knowledge of the Supreme author of the world, when we are utterly incapable of knowing the extent of the world itself, and the numberless undescried regions, with their several states and circumstances, contained in it, never to be frequented or visited by our philosophy; nor can turn ourselves any way, but we are still accosted with something above our understanding? If we cannot penetrate so far into effects, as to discover them and their nature thoroughly, it is not to be expected, that we should, that we can ever be admitted to see through the mysteries of His nature, who is the Cause, so far above them all. The Divine perfection then, and manner of being must be of a kind different from and above all that we can conceive.
</p><p>
However, notwithstanding our own defects, we may positively affirm there can be none in God: since He is perfect, as we have seen, He cannot be defective or imperfect. This needs no further proof. But what follows from it, I would have to be well understood and remembered: <abbr xml:lang="la">viz.</abbr> that from Him must be removed want of life and activity, ignorance, impotence, acting inconsistently with reason and truth, and the like. Because these are defects; defect of knowledge, power, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> These are defects and blemishes even in us. And though his perfection is above all our ideas, and of a different kind from the perfections of men or any finite beings; yet what would be a defect in them, would be much more such in Him, and can by no means be ascribed to Him.<a>
</p><p>
Though we understand not His manner of knowing things; yet ignorance being uniform and the same in every subject, we understand what is meant by that word, and can literally and truly deny that to belong to Him. The like may be said with respect to His power, or manner of operating, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> And when we speak of the internal essential attributes of God positively, as that He is omniscient, omnipotent, eternal, <abbr>etc.</abbr> the intent is only to say, that there is no object of knowledge or power, which He does not know or cannot do, He adds without beginning and end, <abbr>etc.</abbr> and thus we keep still within the limits allowed by the proposition.<a> That is, we may speak thus without pretending to comprehend His nature. And so,
</p><p>
<b>XVII. we may consider God as operating in the production and government of the world, and may draw conclusions from His works, as they are called, notwithstanding any thing which has been said.</b><a> Because this we can do without comprehending the manner of His existence. Nay, the contemplation of His works leads us into a necessity of owning, that there must be an incomprehensible Being at the head of them.
</p><p>
Though I do not comprehend the mode, in which the world depends upon Him and He influences and disposes things, because this enters into His nature, and the one cannot be understood without the other: yet if I see things, which I know cannot be self-existent, and observe plainly an economy and design in the disposition of them, I may conclude that there is some Being, upon whom their existence does depend, and by whom they are modeled; may call this Being <em>God</em>, or the Author and Governor of the world, <abbr>etc.</abbr> without contradicting myself or truth: as I hope it will appear from what has been said, and is going to be said in the next proposition.
</p><p id="v18">
<b>XVIII. God, who gives existence to the world, does also govern it by His providence.</b> Concerning this grand question, “Whether there is a Divine providence, or not,” I use to think, for myself, after the following manner.
</p><p>
First, The world may be said to be <em>governed</em> (at least cannot be said to be <i xml:lang="grc">ἀκυβέρνητος</i>, or left to fluctuate fortuitously), if there are laws, by which natural causes act, the several pbanomena in it succeed regularly, and, in general, the constitution of things is preserved: if there are rules observed in the production of herbs, trees, and the like: if the several kinds of animals are, in proportion to their several degrees and stations in the animal kingdom, furnished with faculties proper to direct and determine their actions; and when they act according to them, they may be said to follow the law of their nature: if they are placed and provided for suitably to their respective natures and wants,<a> or (which amounts to the same thing) if their natures are adapted to their circumstances:<a> if, lastly, particular cases relating to rational beings are taken care of in such a manner, as will at last agree best with reason.
</p><p>
Secondly, If there are such laws and provisions, they can come originally from no other being, but from Him who is the Author of nature. For those laws, which result from the natures of things, their properties, and the use of their faculties, and may be said to be written upon the things themselves, can be the laws of no other: nor can those things, whose very being depends upon God, exist under any condition repugnant to His will; and therefore can be subject to no laws or dispositions, which He would not have them be subject to; that is, which are not His. Beside, there is no other being capable of imposing laws, or any scheme of government upon the world; because there is no other, who is not himself <em>part</em> of the world, and whose own existence does not depend upon Him.
</p><p>
Thirdly, By the “providence of God” I mean His governing the world by such laws, and making such provisions, as are mentioned above. So that if there are such, there is a Divine providence.
</p><p>
Lastly, It is not impossible, that there should be such: on the contrary, we have just reasons to believe there are. It would be an absurd assertion to say, that any thing is impossible to a being whose nature is infinitely above our comprehension, if the terms do not imply a contradiction: but we may with confidence assert, that it is impossible for any thing, whose existence flows from such a being, ever to grow so far out of His reach, or be so emancipated from under Him, that the manner of its existence should not be regulated and determined by Him.
</p><p>
As to inanimate substances, we see the case to be really just as it was supposed before to be. The heavenly and greater bodies keep their stations, or persevere to go the same circuits over and over by a certain law. Little bodies or particles, of the same kind, observe continually the same rules of attracting, repelling, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> When there are any seeming variations in nature, they proceed only from the different circumstances and combinations of things, acting all the while under their ancient laws. We are so far acquainted with the laws of gravitation and motion, that we are able to calculate their effects, and serve ourselves of them, supplying upon many occasions the defect of power in ourselves by mechanical powers, which never fail to answer according to the establishment. Briefly, we see it so far from being impossible, that the inanimate world should be governed by laws, that all the parts of it are obnoxious to laws by them inviolable.
</p><p>
As to vegetables, we see also how they are determined by certain methods prescribed them. Each sort is produced from its proper seed, has the same texture of fibers; is nourished by the same kind of juices out of the earth, digested and prepared by the same kind of vessels, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Trees receive annually their peculiar liveries, and bear their proper fruits: flowers are dressed, each family, in the same colors, or diversify their fashions after a certain manner proper to the kind, and breathe the same essences: and both these and all other kinds observe their seasons, and seem to have their several professions and trades appointed them, by which they produce such food and manufactures (pardon the catachresis), as may satisfy the wants of animals. Being so very necessary, they, or at least the most useful, grow easily: being fixed in the earth, insensible, and not made for society, they are generally <i xml:lang="grc">ἀῤῥενοθήλεα</i>: being liable to a great consumption both of them and their seeds, they yield great quantities of these, in order to repair and multiply their race, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> So that here is evidently a regulation, by which the several orders are preserved, and the ends of them answered according to their first establishment too.
</p><p>
Then as to animals, there are laws, which <i xml:lang="la">mutatus mutandis</i> are common to them with inanimate beings and vegetables, or at least such as refemble<a> their laws. The individuals of the several kinds of those, as of these, have the same (general) shape and members, to be managed after the same manner: have the same vessels replenished with the same kinds of fluids, and furnished with the same glands for the separation and distribution of such parts of them, as answer the same intentions in them all: are stimulated by the same appetites and uneasinesses to take in their food, continue their breed, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> And whatever it is, that proceeds thus in a manner so like to that of vegetables, according to fixed methods, and keeps in the same general track as they do, may be said to observe and be under some like rule or law, which either operates upon and limits it <i xml:lang="la">ab extra</i>, or was given it with its nature. But there are, moreover, certain obligations resulting from the several degrees of reason and sense, or sense only, of which we cannot but be conscious in ourselves, and observe some faint indications in the kinds below us, and which can be looked upon as nothing less than laws, by which animals are to move and manage themselves: that is, otherwise expressed, by which the Author of their natures governs them. ’Tis true these laws may not impose an absolute necessity, nor be of the same rigor with those of inanimate and merely passive beings, because the beings which are subject to these (men at least) may be supposed in some measure free, and to act upon some kind of principles or motives: yet still they may have the nature of laws, though they may be broken; and may make a part of that providence by which God administers the affairs of the world. Whatever advantages I obtain by my own free endeavors, and right use of those faculties and powers I have, I look upon them to be as much the effects of God’s providence and government, as if they were given me immediately by Him, without my acting; since all my faculties and abilities (whatever they are) depend upon Him, and are as it were instruments of His providence to me in respect of such things as may be procured by them.<a>
</p><p>
To finish this head: it is so far from being impossible, that the several tribes of animals should be so made and placed, as to find proper ways of supporting and defending themselves (I mean, so far as it is consistent with the general economy of the world: for some cannot well subsist without the destruction of some others), that, on the contrary, we see men, beasts, birds, fishes, insects all have organs and faculties adapted to their respective circumstances and opportunities of finding their proper food or prey, <abbr>etc.</abbr> even to the astonishment of them who attend to the history of nature. If men, who seem to have more wants than any other kind, meet with difficulties in maintaining life, it is because they themselves, not contented with what is decent and convenient only, have by their luxuries and scandalous neglect of their reason made life expensive.
</p><p>
The world then being not left in a state of confusion or as a chaos, but reduced into order and methodized for ages to come; the several species of beings having their offices and provinces assigned them; plants and animals subsistence set out for them; and as they go off, successors appointed to relieve them, and carry on the scheme, <abbr>etc.</abbr> that the possibility only of a general providence should be allowed, is certainly too modest a demand. We see, or may see, that in fact there is such a providence.<a>
</p><p>
The great difficulty is, how to account for that providence, which is called particular; or that, which respects (principally) particular men. For rational beings and free agents are capable of doing and deserving well, or ill. Some will make a right use of their faculties and opportunities, some will not: the vicious may, or may not repent, or repent and relapse: some fall into evil habits through inadvertence, bad examples, and the like, rather than any design: and these want to be reclaimed: some may be supposed to worship God and to crave His protection and blessing, <abbr>etc.</abbr> and then a proper answer to their prayers may be humbly expected. Hence many and great differences will arise, which will require from a governor suitable encouragements, rewards, correptions, punishments; and that some should be protected and fortunate, others not, or less. Now the good or ill state of a man here, his safety or danger, happiness or unhappiness depend upon many things, which seem to be scarce all capable of being determined by providence. They depend upon what he does himself, and what naturally follows from his own behavior: upon what is done by others, and may either touch him at the same time, or reach him afterward: upon the course of nature, which must affect him: and, in fine, upon many incidents, of which no account is to be given.<a> As to what he does himself, it is impossible for him, as things are in this maze of life, to know always what tends to happiness, and what not: or if he could know, that, which ought to be done, may not be within the compass of his powers. Then, if the actions of other men are free, how can they be determined to be only such, as may be either good or bad (as the case requires) for some other particular man; since such a determination seems inconsistent with liberty? Beside, numbers of men acting every one upon the foot of their own private freedom, and the several degrees of sense and ability which they respectively have, their acts, as they either conspire, or cross and obliquely impede, or perhaps directly meet and oppose each other, and have different effects upon men of different makes, or in different circumstances, must cause a strange embarras, and entangle the plot.<a> And as to the course of nature, if a good man be passing by an infirm building, just in the article of falling, can it be expected, that God should suspend the force of gravitation till he is gone by, in order to his deliveranee; or can we think it would be increased, and the fall hastened, if a bad man was there, only that he might be caught, crushed, and made an example?<a> If a man’s safety or prosperity should depend upon winds or rains, must new motions be impressed upon the atmosphere, and new directions given to the floating parts of it, by some extraordinary and new influence from God? Must clouds be so precipitated, or kept in suspense,<a> as the case of a particular man or two requires? To which add, that the differing and many times contrary interests of men are scarce to be reconciled. The wind, which carries one into the port, drives another back to sea; and the rains, that are but just sufficient upon the hills, may drown the inhabitants of the valleys.<a> In short, may we expect miracles:<a> or can there be a particular providence, a providence that suits the several cases and prayers of individuals, without a continual repetition of them, and force frequently committed upon the laws of nature, and the freedom of intelligent agents? For my part, I verily believe there may. For,
</p><p>
1. It seems to me not impossible, that God should know what is to come: on the contrary, it is highly reasonable to think, that He does and must know things future. Whatever happens in the world, which does not come immediately from Him, must either be the effect of mechanical causes, or of the motions of living beings and free agents. For chance we have seen already is no cause. Now as to the former, it cannot be impossible for Him, upon whom the being and nature of every thing depends, and who therefore must intimately know all their powers and what effects they will have, to see through the whole train of causes and effects, and whatever will come to pass in that way:<a> nay, it is is impossible, that He should <em>not</em> do it. We ourselves, if we are satisfied of the goodness of the materials of which a machine is made, and understand the force and determination of those powers by which it is moved, can tell what it will do, or what will be the effect of it. And as to those things which depend upon the voluntary motions of free agents, it is well known, that men (by whom learn how to judge of the rest) can only be free with respect to such things as are within their sphere; not great, God knows: and their freedom with respect to these can only consist in a liberty either to act, without any incumbent necessity, as their own reason and judgment shall determine them; or to neglect their rational faculties, and not use them at all, but suffer themselves to be carried away by the tendencies and inclinations of the body, which left thus to itself acts in a manner mechanically. Now He, who knows what is in men’s power, what not; knows the make of their bodies, and all the mechanism and propensions of them; knows the nature and extent of their understandings, and what will determine them this or that way; knows all the process of natural (or second) causes, and consequently how these may work upon them:<a> He, I say, who knows all this, may know what men will do, if He can but know this one thing more, <abbr xml:lang="la">viz.</abbr> whether they will use their rational faculties or not. And since even we ourselves, mean and defective as we are, can in some measure conceive, how so much as this may be done, and seem to want but one step to finish the account, can we with any show of reason deny to a Perfect being this one article more, or think that He cannot do that too; especially if we call to mind, that this very power of using our own faculties is held of Him?<a>
</p><p>
Observe what a sagacity there is in some men, not only in respect of physical causes and effects, but also of the future actings of mankind; and how very easy it is many times, if the persons concerned, their characters, and circumstances are given, to foresee what they will do: as also to foretell many general events, though the intermediate transactions upon which they depend are not known.<a> Consider how much more remarkable this penetration is in some men, than in others: consider further, that if there be any minds more perfect than the human, (and who can be so conceited of himself as to question this?) they must have it in a still more eminent degree, proportionable to the excellence of their natures: in the last place, do but allow (as you must) this power of discerning to be, in God proportionable to His nature, as in lower beings it is proportionable to theirs, and then it becomes infinite; and then again, the future actions of free agents are at once all unlocked, and exposed to His view. For that knowledge is not infinite, which is limited to things past or present, or which come to pass necessarily.
</p><p>
After all, what has been said is only a feeble attempt to show, how far even we can go toward a conception of the manner, in which future things may be known: but as we have no adequate idea of an infinite and perfect Being, His powers, and among them His power of knowing, must infinitely pass all our understanding. It must be something different from and infinitely transcending all the modes of apprehending things, which we know anything of.<a>
</p><p>
We know matters of fact by the help of our senses, the strength of memory, impressions made upon fancy, or the report of others (though that indeed is comprehended under <em>senses</em>. For that, which we know only by report, in proper speaking we only know the report of, or we have heard it); and all these ways do suppose those matters either to be present, or once to have been: but is it therefore impossible, that there should be any other ways of knowing? This is so far from being true, that, since God has no organs of sensation, nor such mean faculties as the best of ours are, and consequently cannot know things in the way which we knew them in, if He does not know them by some other way, He cannot know them at all, even though they were present: and therefore there must be other ways, or at least another way of knowing even matters of fact. And since the difficulty we find in determining, whether future matters of fact may be known, arises chiefly from this, that we in reality consider, without minding it, whether they may be known in <em>our way</em> of knowing; it vanishes, when we recollect, that they are and must be known to God by some other way: and not only so, but this must be some way, that is perfect and worthy of Him. Future, or what to us is future, may be as truly the object of Divine knowledge, as present is of ours: nor can we<a> tell, what respect past, present, to come, have to the Divine mind, or wherein they differ. To deaf men there is no such thing as sound, to blind no such thing as light or color: nor, when these things are defined and explained to them in the best manner, which their circumstances admit, are they capable of knowing how they are apprehended. So here, we cannot tell how future things are known perhaps, any more than deaf or blind people what sounds or colors are, and how they are perceived; but yet there may be a way of knowing those, as well as there is of perceiving these. As they want a fifth sense to perceive sounds or colors, of which they have no notion: so perhaps we may want a sixth sense, or some faculty, of which future events may be the proper objects. Nor have we any more reason to deny, that there is in nature such a sense or faculty, than the deaf or blind have to deny, that there is such a sense as that of hearing or seeeing.
</p><p>
We can never conclude, that it is impossible for an infinitely perfect Being to know what a free agent will choose to do, till we can comprehend all the powers of such a Being, and that is till we ourselves are infinite and perfect.<a> So far are we from being able to pronounce with any show of reason, that it is impossible there should be such knowledge in God.
</p><p>
In the last place, this knowledge is not only not impossible, but that which has been already proved concerning the Deity and His perfection does necessarily infer, that nothing can be hid from Him. For if ignorance be an imperfection, the ignorance of future acts and events must be so: and then if all imperfections are to be denied of Him, this must.
</p><p>
There is indeed a common prejudice against the prescience (as it is usually called) of God; which suggests, that, if God foreknows things, He foreknows them infallibly or certainly: and if so, then they are <em>certain</em>; and if certain, then they are no longer matter of freedom. And thus prescience and freedom are inconsistent. But sure the nature of a thing is not changed by being known, or known beforehand. For if it is known truly, it is known to be what it is; and therefore is not altered by this. The truth is, God foresees, or rather sees the actions of free agents, because they will be; not that they will be, because He foresees them.<a> If I see an object in a certain place, the veracity of my faculties supposed, it is certain that object is there: but yet it cannot be said, it is there because I see it there, or that my seeing it there is the cause of its being there: but because it is there, therefore I see it there. It is the object, that determines my sensation: and so in the other case, it is a future choice of the free agent, that determines the prescience, which yet may be infallibly true.<a>
</p><p>
Let us put these two contradictory propositions, B (same particular man) will go to church next Sunday, and B will not go to church next Sunday; and let us suppose withall, that B is free, and that his going or not going depends merely upon his own will. In this case he may indeed do either, but yet he can do but one of these two things, either go, or not go; and one he must do. One of these propositions therefore is now true; but yet it is not the truth of that proposition, which forces him to do what is contained in it: on the contrary, the truth of the proposition arises from what he shall choose to do. And if that truth does not force him, the foreknowledge of that truth will not. We may sure suppose B himself to know certainly beforehand, which of the two he will choose to do, whether to go to church or not (I mean so far as it depends upon his choice only): and if so, then here is B’s own foreknowledge consistent with his freedom: and if we can but, further, suppose God to know as much in this respect as B does, there will be God’s foreknowledge consistent with B’s freedom.
</p><p>
In a word, it involves no contradiction to assert, that God certainly knows what any man will choose; and therefore that he should do this cannot be said to be impossible.
</p><p>
2. It is not impossible, that such laws of nature, and such a series of causes and effects may be originally designed, that not only general provisions may be made for the several species of beings, but, even particular cases, at least many of them, may also, be provided for without innovation: or alterations in the course of nature.<a> It is true, this amounts to a prodigious scheme, in which all things to come are as it were comprehended under one view, estimated, and laid together: but when I consider, what a mass of wonders the universe is in other regards; what a Being God is, incomprehensibly great and perfect; that He cannot be ignorant of anything, no not of the future wants and deportments of particular men; and that all things, which derive from Him as the First cause, must do this so as to be consistent one with another, and in such a manner, as to make one compact system, befitting so great an Author: I say, when I consider this, I cannot deny such an adjustment of things to be within His power.<a> The order of events, proceeding from the settlement of nature, may be as compatible with the due and reasonable success of my endeavors and prayers (as inconsiderable a part of the world as I am),<a> as with any other thing or phenomenon how great soever.
</p><p>
Perhaps my meaning may be made more intelligible thus. Suppose M (some man) certainly to foreknow some way or other that, when he should come to be upon his death-bed, L would petition for some particular legacy; in a manner so earnest and humble, and with such a good disposition, as would render it proper to grant his request: and upon this M makes his last will, by which he devises to L that which was to be asked, and then locks up the will; and all this many years before the death of M, and while L had yet no expectation or thought of any such thing. When the time comes, the petition is made, and granted; not by making any new will, but by the old one already made, and without alteration: which legacy had, notwithstanding that, never been left, had the petition never been preferred. The grant may be called an effect of a future act, and depends as much upon it, as if it had been made after the act. So if it had been foreseen, that L would not so much as ask, and had therefore been left out of the will, this preterition would have been caused by his carriage, though much later than the date of the will. In all this is nothing hard to be admitted, if M be allowed to foreknow the case.<a> And thus the prayers, which good men offer to the All-knowing God, and the neglects of others, may find fitting effects already forecasted in the course of nature. Which possibility may be extended to the labors of men, and their behavior in general.
</p><p>
It is obvious to everyone’s observation, that in fact particular men are very commonly (at least in some measure) rewarded or punished by the general laws and methods of nature. The natural (though not constant) attendents and consequences of virtue are peace, health, and felicity; of vice, loss of philosophical pleasures, a diseased body, debts, and difficulties. Now then, if B be virtuous and happy, C vicious and at last miserable, laboring under a late and fruitless remorse; though this comes to pass through the natural tendence of things, yet these two cases, being supposed such as require, the one that B should be favored, the other that C should suffer for his wickedness, are as effectually provided for, as if God exerted his power in some peculiar way on this occasion.
</p><p>
3. It is not impossible, that men, whose natures and actions are foreknown, may be introduced into the world in such times, places, and other circumstances, as that their acts and behavior may not only coincide with the general plan of things, but also answer many private cases too.<a> The planets and bigger parts of the world we cannot but see are disposed into such places and order, that they together make a noble system, without having their natural powers of attraction (or the force of that which is equivalent to attraction) or any of the laws of motion restrained or altered. On the contrary, being rightly placed, they by the observation of these become subservient to the main design. Now why may there not be in the Divine mind something like a projection of the future history of mankind, as well as of the order and motions and various aspects of the greater bodies of the world? And then why should it not be thought possible for men, as well as for them, by some secret law, though of another kind, or rather by the, presidence and guidance of an unseen governing power, to be brought into their places in such a manner as that by the free use of their faculties, the conjunctions and oppositions of their interests and inclinations; the natural influence and weight of their several magnitudes and degrees of parts, power, wealth, <abbr>etc.</abbr> they may conspire to make out the scheme? And then again, since generals consist of particulars, and in this scheme are comprehended the actions and cases of particular men, they cannot be so situated respectively among the rest of their species as to be serviceable to the principal intention, and fall properly into the general diagram of affairs; unless they and their several actings and cases do in the main correspond one to another, and fit among themselves, or at least are not inconsistent.
</p><p>
Here is no implication of any contradiction or absurdity in all this: and therefore it may at least be fairly supposed. And if so, it will follow, that a particular providence may be compatible with the natural freedom of men’s actions. Such a supposition is certainly not beyond the power of an almighty, perfect Being: it is moreover worthy of Him, and what they, who can dwell a while upon those words, and take their import, must believe.
</p><p>
The ancients I am persuaded had some such thoughts as these. For they were generally fatalists, and yet do not seem to have thought, that they were not masters of their own actions.<a>
</p><p>
4. It is not impossible (for this is all that I contend for here), that many things, suitable to several cases, may be brought to pass by means of secret and sometimes sudden influences on our minds,<a> or the minds of other men, whose acts may affect us. For instance; if the case should require, that N should be delivered from some threatening ruin, or from some misfortune, which would certainly befall him, if he should go such a way at such a time, as he intended: upon this occasion some new reasons may be presented to his mind, why he should not go at all, or not then, or not by that road; or he may forget to go. Or, if he is to be delivered from some dangerous enemy, either some new turn given to his thoughts may divert him from going where the enemy will be, or the enemy may be after the same manner diverted from coming where he shall be, or his [the enemy’s] resentment may be qualified, or some proper method of defence may be suggested, or degree of resolution and vigor excited. After the same manner not only deliverances from dangers and troubles; but advantages and successes may be conferred: or on the other side, men may, by way of punishment for crimes committed, incur mischiefs and calamities. I say, these things and such like may be. For since the motions and actions of men, which depend upon their wills, do also depend upon their judgments, as these again do upon the presxent appearances or non-appearances of things in their minds; if a new prospect of things can be any way produced, the lights by which they are seen altered, new forces and directions impressed upon the spirits, passions exalted or abated, the power of judging enlivened or debliitated, or the attention taken off, without any suspension or alteration of the standing laws of nature, than without that new volitions, designs, measures, or a cessation of thinking may also be preduced, and thus many things prevented, that otherwis would be, and many brought about, that would not. But that this is far from being impossible, seems clear to me. For the operations of the mind following in great measure the present disposition of the body, some thoughts and designs, or absences of mind, may proceed from corporeal causes, acting according to the common laws of matter and motion themselves; and so the case may fall in with <abbr>no.</abbr> 2. or they may be occasiond by something said or done by other men; and then the case may be brought under <abbr>no.</abbr> 3. or they may be caused by the suggestion, and impulse, or other silent communications of some spiritual being; perhaps the Deity himself. For that such imperceptible influences and still whispers may be, none of us all can positively deny: that is, we cannot know certainly, that there are no such things. On the contrary, I believe there are but few of them who have made observations upon themselves and their affairs, but must, when they reflect on life past and the various adventures and events in it, find many instances, in which their usual judgment and sense of things cannot but seem to themselves to have been over-ruled, they knew not by what, nor how,<a> nor why, (<abbr>i.e.</abbr> they have done things, which afterwards they wonder how they came to do), and that these actions have had consequences very remarkable in their history.<a> I speak not here of men demented with wine, or enchanted with some temptation: the thing holds true of men even in their sober and more considering seasons.
</p><p>
That there may be possibly such inspirations of new thoughts and counsels may perhaps further appear from this; that we so frequently find thoughts arising in our heads, into which we are led by no discourse, nothing we read, no clue of reasoning; but they surprise and come upon us from we know not what quarter.<a> If they proceeded from the mobility of spirits, straggling out of order, and fortuitous affections of the brain, or were of the nature of dreams, why are they not as wild, incoherent, and extravagant as they are? Not to add, that the world has generally acknowledged, and therefore seems to have experienced some assistance and directions given to good men by the Deity; that men have been many times infatuated, and lost to themselves, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> If any one should object, that if men are thus overruled in their actings, then they are deprived of their liberty, <abbr>etc.</abbr> the answer is, that though man is a free agent, he may not be free as to everything. His freedom may be restrained, and he only accountable for those acts, in respect of which he is free.
</p><p>
If this then be the case; as it seems to be, that men’s minds are susceptive of such insinuations and impressions, as frequently by ways unknown do affect them, and give them an inclination toward this or that, how many things may be brought to pass by these means without fixing and refixing the laws of nature: any more than they, are unfixed, when one man alters the opinion of another by throwing a book, proper for that purpose, in his way? I say, how many things may be brought about thus, not only in regard of ourselves, but other people, who may be concerned in our actions, either immediately,<a> or in time through perhaps many intermediate events? For the prosperity or improsperity of a man, or his fate here, does not entirely depend upon his own prudence or imprudence, but in great measure upon his situation among the rest of mankind, and what they do. The natural effect of his management meeting with such things, as are the natural effects of the actions of other men, and being blended with them, the result may be something not intended or foreseen.
</p><p>
5. There possibly may be, and most probably are beings invisible, and superior in nature to us, who may by other means be in many respects ministers of God’s providence, and authors under Him of many events to particular men, without altering the laws of nature. For it implies no contradiction or absurdity to say there are such beings: on the contrary we have the greatest reason to think what has been intimated already; that such imperfect beings, as we are, are far below the top of the scale. The pictures of spiritual beings cannot be drawn in our imagination, as of corporeal; yet to the upper and reasoning part of the mind the idea of spiritual substance may perhaps be as clear as that of corporeity.<a> For what penetrability is, must be known just as well as what impenetrability is: and so on.
</p><p>
And since it has been proved (<a href="#motion">see this part of proposition XIII</a>), that all corporeal motions proceed originally from something incorporeal, it must be as certain, that there are incorporeal substances, as that there is motion. Beside, how can we tell but that there may be above us beings of greater powers, and more perfect intellects, and capable of mighty things, which yet may have corporeal vehicles as we have, but finer and invisible? Nay, who knows but that there may be even of these many orders, rising in dignity of nature, and amplitude of power, one above another? It is no way below the philosophy of these times, which seems to delight in enlarging the capacities of matter, to assert the possibility of this. But however, my own defects sufficiently convince me, that I have no pretension to be one of the first rank, or that which is next under the All-perfect.
</p><p>
Now then, as we ourselves by the use of our powers do many times interpose and alter the course of things within our sphere from what it would be, if they were left entirely to the laws of motion and gravitation, without being said to alter those laws; so may these superior beings likewise in respect of things within their spheres, much larger be sure, the least of them all, than ours is: only with this difference, that as their knowledge is more extensive, their intellects purer, their reason better, they may be much properer instruments of Divine providence with respect to us, than we can be with respect one to another, or to the animals below us. I cannot think indeed, that the power of these beings is so large, as to alter or suspend the general laws of the world; or that the world is like a bungling piece of clockwork, which requires to be oft set backward or forward by them; or that they can at pleasure change their condition to ape us, or inferior beings; and consequently am not apt hastily to credit stories of portents, <abbr>etc.</abbr> such as cannot be true, unless the natures of things and their manner of being be quite reversed: yet (I will repeat it again) as men may be so placed as to become, even by the free exercise of their own powers, instruments of God’s particular providence to other men (or animals); so may we well suppose, that these higher beings may be so distributed through the universe, and subject to such an economy (though I pretend not to tell what that is), as may render them also instruments of the same providence; and that they may, in proportion to their greater abilities, be capable, consistently with the laws of nature, some way or other, though not in our way, of influencing human affairs in proper places.
</p><p>
Lastly, what I have ventured to lay before you I would not have to be so understood, as if I peremptorily asserted things to be just in this manner, or pretended to impose my thoughts upon anybody else: my design is only to show, how I endeavor to help my own narrow conceptions. There must be other ways above my understanding,<a> by which such a Being as God is may take care of private cases without interrupting the order of the universe, or putting any of the parts of it out of their channels. We may be sure He regards everything as being what it is; and that therefore His laws must be accommodated to the true genius and capacities of those things, which are affected by them. The purely material part of the world is governed by such, as are suited to the state of a being, which is insensible, passive oniy, and everywhere and always the same: and these seem to be simple and few, and to carry natural agents into one constant road. But intelligent, active, free beings must be under a government of another form; They must, trutht requiring it, be considered as beings, who may behave themselves as they ought, or not; as beings susceptive of pleasure and pain; as beings, who not only owe to God all that they are or have, but are (or may be) sensible of this, and to whom therefore it must be natural upon many occasions to supplicate Him for mercy, defence, direction, assistance; lastly, as beings, whose cases admit great variety: and therefore that influence, by which He is present to them, must be different from that, by which gravitation and common phenomena are produced in matter. This seems to be as it were a public influence, the other private, answering private cases, and prayers; this to operate directly upon the body, the other more especially upon the mind, and upon the body by it, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> But I forbear, lest I should go too far out of my depth: only adding in general, that God cannot put things so far out of His own power, as that He should not forever govern transactions and events in His own world; nor can perfect knowledge and power ever want proper means to achieve what is fit to be done. So that, though what I advanced should stand for nothing, there may still be a particular providence notwithstanding the forementioned difficulty. And then, if there may be one, it will unavoidably follow, that there is one: because in the description of providence, <a href="#v18">see proposition XVIII</a>, nothing is supposed with respect to particular cases but that they should be provided for in such a manner as will at last agree best with reason; and to allow, that this may be done, and yet say, that it is not done, implies a blasphemy that creates horror; it is to charge the Perfect being with one of the greatest imperfections, and to make Him not so much as a <em>reasonable</em> being.
</p><p>
I conclude then, that it is as certain, that there is a particular providence, as that God is a Being of perfect reason. For if men are treated according to reason, they must be treated according to what they are: the virtuous, the just, the compassionate, <abbr>etc.</abbr> as such, and the vicious, unjust, cruel, <abbr>etc.</abbr> according to what they are: and their several cases must;  taken and considered as they are: which cannot be done without such a providence.
</p><p>
Against all this it has been, as one might well expect, objected of old, that things do not seem to be dealt according to reason, virtuous and good men very often laboring under adversity, pains, persecutions, while vicious, wicked, cruel men prevail and flourish.<a> But to this an answer (in which I shall a little further explain myself) is ready. It might be taken out of that, which has been given to the Manichean objection under <a href="#v7">proposition VII</a>. But I shall here give one more direct: and let that and this be mutually assisting and supplements each to the other. 1. We are not always certain, who are good, who wicked.<a> If we trust to fame and reports, these may proceed, on the one hand, from partial friendship, or flattery; on the other, from ill-natured surmises and constructions of things, envy, or malice; and on either, from small matters aggrandized, from mistake, or from the unskillful relation even of truth itself. Opposite parties make a merit of blackening their adversaries,<a> and brightening their friends, undeservedly and unmeasurably: and to idle companions and gossips it is diversion, and what makes the principal part of their conversation,<a> to rehearse the characters of men, dressed up out of their own dreams and inventions. And beside all this, the good or bad repute of men depends in great measure upon mean people, who carry their stories from family to family, and propagate them wery fast: like little insects, which lay apace, and the less the faster. There are few, very few, who have the opportunity and the will and the ability to represent things truly.<a> Beside the matters of fact themselves there are many circumstances which, before sentence is passed, ought to be known and weighed, and yet scarce ever can be known, but to the person himself who is concerned. He may have other views, and another sense of things, than his judges have: and what he understands, what he feels, what he intends, may be a secret confined to his own breast. A man may through bodily indispositions and faults in his constitution, which it is not in his power to correct, be subject to starts and inadvertancies, or obnoxious to snares, which he cannot be aware of; or through want of information or proper helps he may labor under invincible errors, and act as in the dark: in which cases he may do things, which are in themselves wrong, and yet be innocent, or at least rather to be pitied, than censured with severity. Or perhaps the censurer, notwithstanding this kind of men talk as if they were infallible, may be mistaken himself in his opinion, and judge that to be wrong, which in truth is right.<a> Nothing more common than this. Ignorant and superstitious wretches measure the actions of lettered and philosophical men by the tattle of their nurses or illiterate parents and companions, or by the fashion of the country: and people of differing religions judge and condemn each other by their own tenets; when both of them cannot be in the right, and it is well if <em>either</em> of them are. To which may be added, that the true characters of men must chiefly depend upon the unseen part of their lives; since the truest and best religion is most private, and the greatest wickedness endeavors to be so.<a> Some are modest, and hide their virtues: others hypocritical, and conceal their vices under shows of sanctity, good nature, or something that is specious. So that it is many times hard to discern, to which of the two sorts, the good or the bad, a  man ought to be aggregated. 2. It rarely happens, that we are competent judges of the good or bad fortune of other people.<a> That, which is disagreeable to one, is many times agreeable to another, or disagreeable in a less degree. The misery accruing from any infliction or bad circumstance of life is to be computed as in <a href="#IIprop1">Section II</a>: or according to the resistence and capacity of bearing it, which it meets with. If one man can carry a weight of four or five hundred pounds as well as another can the weight of one hundred, by these different weights they will be equally loaded. And so the same poverty or disgrace, the same wounds, <abbr>etc.</abbr> do not give the same pain to all men. The apprehension of but a vein to be opened is worse to some, than the apparatus to an execution is to others: and a word may be more terrible and sensible to tender natures, than a sword is to the senseless, or intrepid breed. The same may be said with respect to enjoyments: men have different tastes, and the use of the same things does not beget equal pleasure in all. Beside, we scarce ever know the whole case. We do not see the inward stings and secret pains, which many of those men carry about them, whose external splendor and flourishing estate is so much admired by beholders:<a> nor perhaps sufficiently consider the silent pleasures of a lower fortune, arising from temperance, moderate desires, easy reflections, a consciousness of knowledge and truth; with other pleasures of the mind, much greater many times than those of the body.<a> Before one can pronounce another happy or otherwise, he should know all the other’s enjoyments and all his sufferings.<a> Many misfortunes are compensated<a> by some larger endowments, or extraordinary felicities in other respects. But suppose the pleasures of some, and the sufferings of some others, to be just as they appear: still we know not the consequences of them.<a> The pleasures of those men may lead to miseries greater than those of the latter, and be in reality the greater misfortune: and, again, the sufferings of these may be preludes to succeeding advantages.<a> So that indeed we know not how to name these outward appearances of particular men, nor which to call happiness, which the contrary, unless we knew the inward sense of the persons themselves, all their true circumstances, and what will be hereafter consequent upon their present success or adversity. 3. Men ought to be considered as members of families, nations, mankind, the universe, from which they cannot be separated: and then from the very condition of their being it will appear, that there must be great inequalities;<a> that the innocent cannot but be sometimes involved in general calamities or punishments, nor the guilty but share in public prosperities;<a> and that the good of the whole society or kind is to be regarded preferably to the present pleasure of any individual, if they happen to clash.<a> Lastly, if the virtuous man has undergone more in this life, than it would be reasonable he should suffer, if there was no other; yet those sufferings may not be unreasonable, if there <em>is</em> another; For they may be made up to him by such enjoyments, as it would be reasonable for him to prefer, even with those previous mortifications, before the pleasures of this life with the loss of them. And moreover, sometimes the only way to the felicities of a better state may lie through dark and difficult passes, discipline to some men being necessary, to bring them to reflect, and to force them into such methods as may produce in them proper improvements; such, as otherwise and of themselves they would never have fallen into. On the other side, if vicious and wicked men do prosper and make a figure; yet it is possible their sufferings hereafter may be such, as that the excess of them above their past enjoyments may be equal to the just mulct of their villanies and wickedness. And further, their worldly pleasures (which must be supposed to be such as are not philosophical, or moderated and governed by reason and habits of virtue) being apt to fill the mind, and engross the whole man, and by that means to exclude almost all right reflections, with the proper applications of them, may be the very causes of their ruin; while they leave them under such defects at the end of their days, as we shall see afterward tend to unhappiness.
</p><p>
If what is objected be in many instances true, this only infers the necessity of a future state: that is, if good and bad men are not respectively treated according to reason in this life, they may yet be so treated, if this and another to follow be taken together into the account.<a> And perhaps it is (as I have been always apt to think) in order to convince us of the certainty of a future state, that instances of that kind have been so numerous. For he must not only be guilty of blasphemy, but reduced to the greatest absurdity, who, rather than he will own there is such a state, is forced to make God an unreasonable Being:<a> which I think amounts to a strong demonstration, that there is one. But of that more hereafter.
</p><p>
<b>XIX. If we would behave ourselves as being what we cannot but be sensible we are, towards God as being what He is according to the foregoing propositions;</b> or, <b>if we would endeavor to behave ourselves towards him according to truth, we must observe these following and the like particulars.</b>
</p><p>
1. We must not pretend to represent Him by any picture or image whatsoever.<a> Because this is flatly to deny his incorporeity, incomprehensible nature, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr><a>
</p><p>
2. We ought to be so far from doing this, that even the language we use, when we speak of Him, and efpecially of his positive nature and essential properties, ought not only to be chosen with the utmost care, but also to be understood in the sublimest sense: and the same is true with respect to our thoughts, <i xml:lang="la">mutatis mutandis</i>.<a> Or thus: we must endeavor to think and speak of Him in the most reverent terms and most proper manner we are able;<a> keeping withal this general conclusion, and as it were habitual reflection in our minds, that, though we do the best we can, He is still something above all our conceptions; and desiring, that our faint expressions may be taken as aiming at a higher and more proportionable meaning. To do otherwise implies not only, that His mode of existence and essential attributes are comprehensible by us, but also (which is more) that our words and phrases, taken from among ourselves<a> and the objects of our faculties, are adequate expressions of them: contrary to truth.
</p><p>
To explain myself by a few instances. When we ascribe mercy to God, or implore His mercy, it must not be understood to be mercy like that, which is called compassion in us. For though this be a very distinguishing affection in human nature,<a> to which we are made subject for good reasons, the constitution of the world and circumstances of our present state making it necessary for us to compassionate each the sufferings of another; yet it is accompanied with uneasiness, and must therefore not be ascribed strictly to God in that sense, in which it is used when ascribed to ourselves. It perhaps may not be amiss to call it “Divine mercy,” or the like; to distinguish it: and to show, that we mean something, which, though in our low way of speaking and by way of analogy we call it by the same name, is yet in the perfect nature of God very different. Or we may consider it in general as the manner, in which God respects poor supplicants and proper objects for their good. For certainly the respect or relation, which lies between God, considered as an unchangeable Being, and one that is humble and supplicates and endeavors to qualify himself for mercy, cannot be the same with that, which lies between the same unchangeable God and one that is obstinate, and will not supplicate, or endeavor to qualify himself:<a> that is, the same thing, or Being, cannot respect opposite and contradictory characters in the same manner; him who does behave himself as before, and him who does not. Therefore when we apply to the mercy of God, and beg of him to pity our infirmities and wants, the design is not to move His affections, as good speakers move their auditors by the pathetic arts of rhetoric, or hearty beggars theirs by importunities and tears; but to express our own sense of ourselves and circumstances in such a manner, as may render us more capable of the emanations of Divine goodness, and fit to receive such instances of His beneficience, as to us may seem to be the effects of compassion, though they proceed not from any alteration in the Deity. For it may be, and no doubt is agreeable to perfect reason always and without alteration, that he, who labors under a sense of his own defects, honestly uses his best endeavors to mend what is amiss, and (among other things) flies for relief to Him, upon whom his being and all that he has do depend, should have many things granted him, which are not given to the careless, obdurate, unasking<a> part of mankind; though his expressions and manner of address, with all his care, are still inadequate, and below the Divine nature. In short, by our applications we cannot pretend to produce any alteration in the Deity, but by an alteration in ourselves we may alter the relation or respect lying between him and us.
</p><p>
As God is a pure, uncompounded Being, His attributes of mercy, justice, <abbr>etc.</abbr> cannot be as we conceive them: because in him they are one. Perhaps they may more properly be called together Divine reason: which, as it exerts itself upon this or that occasion, is by us variously denominated.
</p><p>
Here it must not be forgot, that mercy or mercies are many times taken for advantages or benefits enjoyed by us: and then they are properly ascribed to God, from whom they proceed as the effects of His beneficience and providence.
</p><p>
When we speak of the knowledge of God, we must not mean, that He knows things in the way that we do: that any intention or operation of His mind is requisite to produce it: that He apprehends things by any impressions made upon Him: that He reasons by the help of ideas: or even that the knowledge, which in us is most intuitive and immediate, does in any degree come up to the mode in which He knows things. We must rather intend, in general, that there is nothing, of which He is, or can be ignorant: which has been said already; and is, I am afraid, as much as we can safely say.
</p><p>
When glory, honor, praise<a> are given to God; or He is said to do anything for His own glory, or we we to propose the glory of His name in what we do; those words should not be taken as standing for that kind of glory and applause, which is so industriously sought, and capriciously<a> distributed among us mortals, and which I will take this opportunity to handle a little more largely, in order to give here a specimen of the world, and save that trouble in another place. Among us some are celebrated for small matters, either through the ignorance of the multitude, the partiality of a faction, the advantage of great friendships, the usual deference paid to men in eminent stations, or mere good luck;<a> and others for achieving such things, as if they were duly weighed, and people were not imposed upon by false notions, first introduced in barbarous times, and since polished and, brought into fashion by historians, poets, and flatterers, would appear rather to be a disgrace to savages than any recommendation of rational and civilized natures. Strength, and courage, and beauty, and parts, and birth are followed with encomiums and honors, which, though they may be the felicities and privileges of the possessors, cannot be their merit, who received them gratis, and contributed nothing<a> themselves toward the acquisition of them: while real virtue and industry (which, even when unsuccessful, or oppressed by ill health or unkind fortune, give the truest title to praise) lie disregarded. Thirst after glory, when that is desired merely for its own sake, is founded in ambition and vanity:<a> the thing itself is but a dream, and imagination; since, according to the differing humors and sentiments of nations and ages, the same thing may be either glorious or inglorious the effect of it, considered still by itself, is neither more health, nor estate, nor knowledge, nor virtue to him who has it; or if that be anything, it is but what must cease when the man<a> dies: and, after all, as it lives but in the breath of the people, a little sly envy or a new turn of things extinguishes it,<a> or perhaps it goes quite out of itself.<a> Men please themselves with notions of imnortality, and fancy a perpetuity of fame secured to themselves by books and testimonies of historians: but, alas! it is a stupid delusion, when they imagine themselves present, and enjoying that fame at the reading of their story after their death. And, beside, in reality the man is not known ever the more to posterity, because his name is transmitted to them: <em>he</em> does not live, because his <em>name</em> does. When it is said, Julius Cæsar subdued Gaul, beat Pompey, changed the Roman commonwealth into a monarchy, <abbr>etc.</abbr> it is the same thing, as to say, the conqueror Pompey, <abbr>etc.</abbr> was Cæsar: that is, Cæsar and the conqueror of Pompey are the same thing; and Cæsar is as much known by the one designation as by the other. The amount then is only this: that the conqueror of Pompey conquered Pompey; or somebody conquered Pompey; or rather, since Pompey is as little known now as Cæsar, somebody conquered somebody.<a> Such a poor business is this boasted immortality:<a> and such, as has been here described, is the thing called glory among us! The notion of it may serve to excite them, who having abilities to serve their country in time of real danger, or want, or to do some other good, have yet not philosophy enough to do this upon principles of virtue, or to see through the glories of the world (just as we excite children by praising them; and as we see many good inventions and improvements proceed from emulation and vanity): but to discerning men this fame is mere air, and the next remove from nothing;<a> what they despise, if not shun. I think there are two considerations, which may justify a desire of some glory or honor: and scarce more. When men have performed any virtuous actions, or such as sit easy upon their memories, it is a reasonable pleasure to have the testimony of the world added to that of their own consciences, that they have done well:<a> and more than that, if the reputation acquired by any qualification or action may produce a man any real comfort or advantage (if it be only protection from the insolencies and injustice of mankind; or if it enables him to do by his authority more good to others), to have this privilege must be a great satisfaction, and what a wise and good man may be allowed, as he has opportunity, to propose to himself. But then he proposes it no farther than it may be useful: and it can be no farther useful than he wants it. So that, upon the whole, glory, praise, and the like, are either mere vanity, or only valuable in proportion to our defects and wants. If then those words are understood according to the import and value they have among men, how dares anyone think, that the Supreme being can propose such a mean end to himself as our praises? He can neither want, nor value them. Alexander, according to his taste of things, it may well be supposed would have been proud to have heard that he should be the subject of some second Homer,<a> in whose sheets his name might be embalmed for ages to come; or to have been celebrated at Athens, the mother of so many wits and captains: but sure even he, with all his vanity, could not propose to himself as the end of all his fatigues and dangers only to be praised by children, or rather by worms and insects, if they were capable of showing some faint sense of his greatness.<a> And yet how far short is this comparison! In conclusion therefore, though men have been accustomed to speak of the Deity in terms taken from princes, and such things as they have, in their weakness, admired; though these are now incorporated into the language of Divines; and though, considering what defects there are in our ways of thinking and speaking, we cannot well part with them all: yetwe must remember to exalt the sense of them, or annex some mental qualification to the use of them. As, if God be said to do things for His own glory, the meaning I humbly conceive must be, that the transcendent excellence of His nature may be collected from the form of the world and administration of things in it; where there occur such marks of inexpressible wisdom and power, that He needed not to have given us greater, had He only intended His own glory: or something to this purpose. Or if the glory of what <em>we</em> do, be ascribed to Him; by this must be signified, that no glory is due to us, who have no powers, but what originally depend upon Him; and that we desire therefore to acknowledge Him to be the true author of all that, which is laudable in us.<a>
</p><p>
When we thank God for any deliverance or enjoyment, this must not be so understood, as if He could value Himself upon our ceremonious acknowledgments, or wanted complements, or any return from us. It is rather a profession of the sense we have of our wants and defects, of the beneficience of His nature, and the greatnefs or reasonableness of the mercies received: an effort of a poor dependent being, who desires to own things, as far as he is able, to be what they are;<a> and especially to beget in himself such a disposition of mind, as he ought to have towards his Almighty benefactor.
</p><p>
When we are said to be servants of God, or to serve Him, or do Him service, these phrases are not to be taken as when one man is said to be servant of another, or to do him service. For here it implies the doing of something, which is useful and beneficial to the man who is served, and what he wants, or fancies he wants: but nothing of want can be supposed in God, nor can we any way be profitable or serviceable to Him. To serve Him therefore must rather be to worship or adore Him (of which something by and by). And thus that word in another language, of which our serve is but the transtation, is frequently used: as “to serve a graven image”<a> is to worship the image; but cannot signify the doing of anything, which may be serviceable or useful to the dead stone. Or “to serve God” may be understood in a sense something like that: Serve the king of Babylon.<a> For they were said to serve the king of Babylon, who owned his authority, and lived according to his laws, though they did nothing, nor had anything perhaps, which could be particularly serviceable to him: and so they may be said to serve God, or to be His servants, who live in a continual sense of His sovereign nature and power over them, and endeavor to conform themselves to the laws which He has imposed upon them.<a> In these senses we pray, that we may live to serve Him: that is, we pray, that we may live to worship Him, and practice those laws of reason and virtue, to which rational natures are by Him subjected.<a>
</p><p>
Many more reflections might be made upon epithets and ways of speaking, introduced by custom, from rude antiquity, or by necessity following from the narrowness either of men’s minds, or their language. It is plain, that love, anger, hands, eyes, <abbr>etc.</abbr> when ascribed to God, cannot import such bodily parts or passions as are found in us. Even the pronouns, my, thy, his (as His people, His house, <abbr>etc.</abbr>) require much temper in the use of them.<a>
</p><p>
3. We shall find ourselves bound to worship Him, in the best manner we can. For by worshipping Him I mean nothing but owning Him to be what He is, and ourselves to, be what we are, by some more solemn and proper act: that is, by addressing ourselves as His dependents to Him as the Supreme cause, and Governor of the world, with acknowledgments of what we enjoy, petitions for what we really want, or He knows to be convenient for us,<a> and the like. As if, <abbr>e.g.</abbr> I should in same humble and composed manner<a> pray to that <em>Almighty being, upon whom depends the existence of the world, and by whose providence I have been preserved to this moment, and enjoyed may undeserved advantages, that He would graciously accept my grateful sense and acknowledgments of all His beneficience toward me: that he would deliver me from the evil consequences of all my transgressions and follies: that He would endow me with such dispositions and powers, as may carry me innocently and safely through all future trials; and may enable me upon all occasions to behave myself conformably to the laws of reason, piously, and wisely: that He would suffer no being to injure me, no misfortune to befall me, nor me to hurt myself by any error or misconduct of my own: that He would vouchsafe me clear and distinct perceptions of things; with so much health and prosperity, as may be good for me: that I may at least pass my time in peace, with contentment, and tranquillity of mind: and that, having faithfully discharged my duty to my family and friends, and endeavored to improve myself in virtuous habits and useful knowledge, I may at last make a decent and happy exit, and then find myself in some better state.</em> Not to do this, or something like it, will certainly fall among those criminal omissions mentioned in <a href="#prop5">Section I, proposition V</a>. For never to acknowledge the enjoyments and privileges we have received, and hold of God, is in effect to deny that we receive them from Him; nor to apply to Him for what we want is to deny either our wants, or His power of helping us, and so on: all contrary to truth.<a>
</p><p>
It must ever be owned, that no worship can be proportionable to the Divine nature and perfections; but yet that we are obliged to do what we can: therefore I added those words “in the best manner we can.” And it must be acknowledged further, that those words do not oblige us to be <em>always</em> at our devotions neither.<a> For as in the worship of God we own Him to be what He is, so must we do this as not denying ourselves to be what we are: beings not capable of bearing continual intention of mind; beings, that are encompassed with many wants, which by the constitution of our nature require to be supplied, not without care and activity joined to our prayers; beings, that are made for many harmless enjoyments; beings, that have many offices to perform one for another; and beings, in whom, all things considered, it would be less respect to be constantly in the formal act of devotion, than it is to address ourselves to Him with prepared minds, at certain times, or upon certain occasions. To be always thus engaged, if it could be, would be to make God what He is not: since it seems to suppose, that He wants it and we merit Him by it; or that He is bound to give what we ask, without our endeavoring; or, at least, that He is a Being obnoxious to importunity and teasing. For these reasons I have also in the explication of my meaning inserted that limitation, “by some solemn and proper act.”
</p><p>
Though every man knows best his own opportunities and circumstances, and therefore may be most able to judge for himself, how he may best perform this duty; yet in general it may be said, that to the doing of it solemnly and in the best manner we can these things are required: an intent mind,<a> proper times and places, a proper form of words, and a proper posture. For if the mind be absent, or attends not to what is said, it is not the man that prays: this is only as it were the noise of a machine, which is put into motion indeed, but without any consciousness of its own act. To repeat one’s prayers with moving lips, but alienated thoughts, is not to pray in the best manner we can: because it is not in a manner agreeable to what we are, or to truth. For this is to do it only as speaking, and not as thinking beings.
</p><p>
Upon this account it will be certain, that all times and places cannot be equally proper.<a> Some times are engrossed by the business of life, and some places lie exposed to interruptions. Those of retreat and silence ought to be sought, and, as far as fairly it may be, contrived. And for this further reason, because the farther we are removed from the notice of others, the clearer we stand of all ostentation: that is, the more we do it upon the score of truth and duty; and this is again, the more truly and dutifully we do it.
</p><p>
Our next care is a proper form of words. All prayer must either be vocal, or mental. Now even that which is called mental can scarce be made without words,<a> or something equivalent.<a> (I believe, that even the deaf and dumb form to themselves some kind of language: I mean something, which supplies the room of language.) For thoughts in their naked state, divested of all words, and taken merely by themselves, are such subtle and fleeting things, as are scarce capable of making any appearance in the mind; at least of being detained, compared together, and arranged into sentences. If a sentence may be so made up of sensible ideas as to subsist in the mind by the help of those images which remain in the fantasy, after the manner of a sentence expressed in pictures, or by hieroglyphics: yet snch a sentence must be very imperfect, through the want of grammatical inflections, particles, and other additions necessary to modify and connect the ideas, of which (particles, <abbr>etc.</abbr>) there can be no images;<a> and indeed little more than a set of disjointed conceptions, scarce exhibiting any sense without the assistance of language to fill up the blanks: and beside that, a prayer cannot be made out of such sentences as those. It is by the help of words, at least in great measure, that we even reason and discourse within ourselves, as well as communicate our thoughts and discourse with others: and if anyone observes himself well, he will find, that he thinks, as well as speaks in some language,


f Malta [m weréa, qua, guaﬁ articali, emeAnnt mambo
oratiom's, gueformari ﬂmi/itudz'm walla poﬂazt. “There are
"‘ many Words (particles) which are like small joints, to con-

.“neﬁ the several sentences, which-cannot be exhibited by any
« images." Cm.

and

Truth "bring to the  227

and that in thinking he fuppoiles and runs over
silently and habitually those sounds, which in speak-
ing he actually makes. This is the cause why men
can scarce write well in any language but tlm'r
own: for while they think in their own, their ityle
and speech, which is but the portraiture of their
thoughts, must: have the turn and genius of their
own language, to what language soever the parti-
cular words belong. In short, word: seem to be as
it were bodies or webitle: to the sense or meaning,
which is the spiritual part ‘, and which without
the other can hardly be fixed in the mind. Let any
man try ingenuoufly, whether he can think over
' but that shurt praer in Plato, Ta‘ (xiv iSma‘, mm. ',
.abﬂracted quite from those and all other words;
One  apply his mind to the words of a prayer
pronounced by another, and by taking them in
make them his own; or he may be as it were his
own reader, and pronounce them ling/Elf; or he
may lay before him a prayer in writing, and so carry
his eyes and his mind together through it; or he
may go oVer a form of words imprinted on his
man; or he may put words together in his
mind or temper:: but (till in all these ways word:
and language are used. And since‘to tbz'nk over a
sct of words cannot be a more adequate manner of

o new s25: qua rm: Nb: 715911. “A prayer, with-
‘,‘ outthe intention of the mind,is like a body without a soul."
N Aim. an. ‘~ . .

‘ AJa'J. z. Thewordsofthe Poet in Plato are these: “O
“yapiter. our king, give us thofethings that are good for us,
" whether weal]: for them or no; and command those things
“that are hurtful an be kept from us, though we pray for
“them." ,

Q2 addressing



228 The RELIGION of NA'i‘URE. Se&.V.

addrefﬁng to God (who neither speaks, nor thinks
like us) than to speak it over and tbz'n/t too; and
moreover, since the very found of the words aﬁ'eéts.
us, and, when the form is ready prepared, and the
mind freed from the labor of compoling, dOth
really help attention “: I say, since this is the case,
it must be better, when we have opportunity, to
pronounce a prayer ", than only to tln'nk it over.
But then it should be spoken no louder (I mean
when we pray privately), than just .to make it au-
dible to ourﬁl'vo: ". It is not upon God's account
that we (peak, since he would know even our

thoughts:

“'13! H.313! N1” CNN '11:“!- “When a man speaks dif-
“tinétly, it is always with intenseness.” ABARB. That in S.
Hbared. quoted out of F’VDD “the leﬂ‘er book of precepts," ex-
plains this thus: mm sin: n'vm the ‘73: mm
C'J‘Jlﬂi, “He will consider every word exactly, as if he was
“looking over his debts.” _

V -—--Ut ea: [deo:,] [Emper- pura— mute 55’ more «veneremur.
“-—That‘ we may always worship them ” (the Gods, in the
iter of the Heathens) “with a pure—mind, and with pure
“words.” C to}?! wait JAM» (do! 6773:3, Man-01¢, npele’hng 70‘
76mg", who. will or? other?! ,usyahuévrwm opiates. “That as
“thou, O Lord, halt made us better than other creatures, so
“it becomes us the, more to praise thy greatnefs;" says Solo-
mon in his prayer 4/». 741/2126. _

x This we find often among the Dinim “orders ” of the
yawmmrz mnw no mmh y‘aw‘w 1mg 35:: math-n
“It is necessary in all our prayers, that we so speak as to be
“heard by ourselves.” Mam. And R. Elaz. Azguzm', having .
cited this passage, adds uh can: mean:m moon
'13} mi N‘? mm‘z yawn. “In general the judges agree
“in this, that if he does not hear his own self, he is guilty (of a
“crime") Maimonidor in another place expreffes himself thus:
wian Elm-m 1mm mm [uh] uh; Show N'?
15an mm’z prowm. n A “man should not (Only) pray in
“his mind, but pronounce the words diliinétly with his lips;

. ‘ “and



Trath relating to the Deity: 2 29

thoughts: but it is upon our own account, and to
make our adoration, tho imperfect at the belt, as
compleat as we are able. (Which, by the way, is
an answer to them, who object againit prayer the
imminent: of talking to God.) This being pre-
mifed, and it being found that we must make use
of words, it cannot be denied that we ought to use
the be]! and properly} we can. This cannot be done in
cxtemparaneau: eﬂ'uﬁons: and therefore there must
be forms premeditated; the by}, that we are capa-
ble of making or procuring, if we would worship
God to the bell of our capacity. As a prayer ought
to have all the' marks of ferioufnefs and being in
earnei’t, it ought to be the plainejl, and at the same
time is perhaps the bank]! of all compoﬁtions. It
ought to take in a general view of what we have
iry'qyd, what we want, what we have done, etc.
and every thing ought "to be exprel’c with metlwd,
in phrases that are grave and pointing, and with
such a true eloquence, as engages all our attention,
and represents our deepg/i sense, without aﬁeﬂan‘on
or needleﬁ repetitions. These considerations have
caused me many times to wonder at those men, who
dispute against: pre-conceived forms of prayer. ,
They, who talk so much of the spirit of prayer,
seem to know but little of it. '

As to the po/iure, that is beft, which best ex-
prws our humility, reverence 7, and earnel’tnefs,

“and whisper so as to hear himself.” (That word 13‘7, on-
“ly,” I inserted from Sbulbb. araé.) The same occurs in Or
Maw, 69 Mi-

r 'm min mow firm mow—5551mm. « H:
“that prays—mould think about it as much as if the divine
“prefence could appear to him.” Orb/mi].

Q; and















zgo The RELIGION of NATURE. ~Sec‘.‘t.V’.

and affects us most. Tho perhaps same regard is
to be paid to the customs of the place where we are 3
or of our own country to which we have been most
used. Several nations may denote the same thing
by different geiiures: and we may take these, as
we do their words; i.e. as having that signification
‘ which they put upon them. ' .
Tho I have not hitherto mentioned it, there
ought to be also a public wow of the Deity. F or
a man may be considered as a member of a fodety,
and as fuel: he ought- to worship God (if he has
the opportunity of doing it: if there are proper
prayers used publicly, which he may refort to;
and his health, 8c. permit). Or the foamy may
be considered as one body, that has common inte-o
reds and concerns, and as fuel: is obliged to wor-
ihip the Deity, and offer one common prayer. Be-
. side, there are many, who know not of themselves,
bow to pray; perhaps cannot so much as read.
These too must be taken as they arr, and confeq
‘ quently some time and place appaintad, where they
may have suitable prayers red to them, and. be ‘
guided in their devotions. And further, toward
the keeping mankind in order, it is augﬂary there
should be some religion professed, and even esuch-
lifhd; which cannot be without some public wor~
ihip. Andi were it not for that sense of virtue,
which is principally preserved (so far as it is pre-
served) by national form: and baht: of religion,
men would soon lose it all, run wild, prey upon
one another, and do what clfe the word of favages
do. ‘ ‘
But how does this public worship, it may be
demanded, comport with that retreat and prian
‘ recom-

Wuth rehtiag to the Deity. a; I

recommended above? Anﬂ I spoke there of prayer
in general, to which those circumstances give a
great advantage: but then they are recommended
no farther, than they can be had, and the nature
of the prayer- admits of them. Excuse a short re-
ﬂexion here, which if it be not directly for the
purpose, is net altogether foreign to it.. Tho he
who reads the form of public prayer reads it to
all at thefame time, that all may unite in one com-
men act, which otherwise they could not do: yet
still every particular person, who minds the prayers
at all, has a Ie'parate perception of the words in
his mind, and tbera  others them, or the-sense
eontaind underthem, with more or lcfs. applica~
‘ tion and ardor. And since no man can be said to
pray any ﬁarther than he does ibis: and it cannot be
known to any body in the congregation belidc
hieffectif, how far he doll: do it; his prayer is in
reality as privale, as if he was indode within a
thoufand walls. So that, though there are reasons
‘ for a public worship, yet I will venture to affirm,
that all true prayer is private: and the true feat of
it being in the wind, toward the interefting of
whoﬁ: powers all the circumstances of worship are
mainiy designed to.contribute, it may be said upon
that account to be always made in the most re-
tired and undiﬁmzed of all retreats 2: nor can
more be laid in rel'peét of a worship, which by the
terms is in other relpeﬂs public. A man may be
present in a congregation, and either pray the same
. prayer in which others seem to join, or same other,

1 'Bv with. .7» n6}. “In aprivate retirement, as in a
5‘ temple.” PLo'rrN. _
Q4 or



132 The RELIGION of NATURE. Seé't.V.

or none at all a, for ought any body there can tell
belid'es himself. ‘ ,

I am not insensible how much I may expofe
myself by these things to the laughter of some,
who are utter i’trangers to all this language. ‘What
a [lit is here, say they, about praying .? Who 'ever
observed, that they who pray are more fuccq/sful
or happy, than they are who do not ? duf. All ob-
fervations of this kind 'must be very lubricom and
uncertain. We neither, know what Other men are
inwardly and really b, nor how they play °, nor
what to calllsuccess ‘. T hat;~which is good for one,
may be bad for another: and that, which icems
good at present, may at length be evil, or intro-

3 S. Cbry/bﬂam says some are so unmindful of what they are
about, that they know not so much as, what they say them?
felvcs, Eieépxorrau «MAN: 5; we? handy—u) iiipxowul, a) 8'» ol-
J‘am vri e‘imv' q-e‘. pct—sM rancher, i J? data); 8’» «ixb’ﬂ. “A great many
“come to church,—-and go home again, without so much as
“knowing what they have said. Their lips moved, but their
“words were not hear .” ‘

b The very Heathens thought, that the Gods would not
hear the prayers of wicked men. Bias happening to be with
some such in the same fhip, whena great sform arofe and they
(being now frighted) began to invoke their deities, cries
Out, 2373'", ,m} aria-Sana inc new. alienate, “Hold your
“tongues, they’ll take no notice of us, while we fail here." D.L.

c C. Cg/iz'u: up. Tar. lays, principe: guide»: inﬂar dearum g/é:

ﬂd neque a iii: 71% jzfﬂa: ﬁzpplicum prece: audiri. “Princes in—
“deed are like Gods, but the Gods thceffectlves will not hear
“the prayers of the fupplicant, unless they be just.”

‘1 Sometimes all" 5m” can-5:, “half is better than the
“whole:" that is, as Plato paraphrases those words of Hgﬁad,
T6 ﬁpwu tn? cram-6: caudal; 393 azéov, 3min" g m? ,u‘sv 3M7 Arm: ‘

V Cdmv (uptake. n. “Many times half is better than the whole,
_“and when it is so, to receive the whole is an injury to Us.’_’

duce



Truths relating to the Deity. a 33

duce something which is ('0 °. And as to the prof-
perity of them, who endeavor to worship God in
a proper and reasonable manner, whatever it is,
perhaps it might be left, if they did not; or their.
misfortunes might be greater: who can be certain
of the contrary ? If these gentlemen have any way.
of discovering it, I with they would impart their,
feeret. In the mean time sure they cannot exPe&,.
that even in the most imperfect ﬂtetch of natural
religion the worship of the Deity should be omitted:
that very thing, which has been principally in-.
tended by the word religion ‘.

4.. And lastly, to deliver what remains, fumma-.
rily; Rational beings, or they, to whom reason is the
great law of their nature,  they would behave
themselves as above, fbould eon/ider in earne/i, what
a mighty being He is, who by the eon/litution of their
nature has laid them under an obligation of being ,
governel by it, and who/e law: the distate: of right
reason may be fair! to be. They ought to keep it
well imprel’t upon their minds, that He is the be-

e Qyid quad iﬂe calculi candor: Iaudatu: die: originem mali ha-
bea't P Quart nut/to: aceepta aﬂixere imperia ? yuan: multo: bond
perdidere, 8’ «Ideal: met/ere fupplieii: 1’ “What if that day,
“' which came up lucky, should be the beginning of evil?
“How many, in great power, have been ruined by it P How
“_ many has prosperity Adestroyed, land fpbjeEted them to the
“greateli punishments P” PLIN.

f Religio element eultn pio continetur. “Religion consists in a
“devout worshipping of the Gods.” Crc. 214i omnia, gue ad
culture: deorum pertinerent, diligent” retrat‘i'arent, s9’ tanqaam re-
legerent, [ant diéti religio/i, etc. “They are called religious
“persons, because they are continually revolving and repeat-
“ing over and over again the things that belong tothc war.

“ship of the Gods.” 1d.

l

ing



134, The RILlOION of NATUR e. Seétl VI.
ing, upon whom their very exzﬂence depends: that
it is He who sUperintends and adminiﬁers the af-.
ﬂairs of the world by His providence: that the cfo‘
sects of His power and influence are visible before
their faces, and round about them, in all the phat:
amend of nature, not one of which could be with.-
out Him: that they are always~ in His prcfeme:
that He is a being of perfeé? flea/bu: that, if it be.
red/Enable, that the tranfgreﬂ‘ors of reason thunk!“
be punished, they Will most certainly, on: time or
ﬁher, be punished, (9’6. And then, if they do this,
it is easy to see what effect it must have upon
their thoughts, wérair 3, and affinity. '

~ By what is laid here, no fuperﬂz'tim is intended
to be introduced: -it is only the praé‘tice of red/m
and truth, which is required: and any thing, that
is not hung/sﬂan} with them, may be freely. done,
. tho under the infp'eétion of our great Lawgiver'
himself. 7

$3 or. v1. Truths rﬂeﬂing Mankind is
general, antecedent to all human laws.

N this and the following sections I shall proceed
as in the foregoing.

I. E7:er man has in himself a principle of indivi-
izmim, which dz'ﬂiig‘m'ﬂm and Mamie: him
a ' 43

z Particularly with respect to cuﬂammyfweariug; which.
heﬁde the ill consequences it has in making oaths cheap, 59%.
is a great instance of disregard and irreverence. For they, who
use themselves to it do, at least, make the tremendous name
0f God to serve for an‘explctz'eve only; and commonly to rude,

pactionate,

Truth: refpeﬂing Mankind, £9". ~ 235

all other men in facb a manner, as may render bin;
and them capable of diﬂlm‘i‘ properties in 'tlaings (or
drﬂinﬂ subjectr 9" property). That is, B and C are
so distinguishd, or exist so di/llnﬂbr, that if there
be any thing which B can call hair, it will be for
that reason not C’:: and o. «0. what is C’s will for
that rea-fon not be B’s. The proof of this Iput upon
every man’s own conscience. Let us see then whe-

ther there is any thing, which one man may truly
call his. '

II. There are firm things, to which (at lagﬂ befan
the case 1': altered by voluntary fabjeﬁian, campast, ar
the like) every Mitddual man bar, or may bear, furl»
a nataral and immediate relation, that be only of all .
mankind can wilt/12m his. .

The life, link, Sec. of B are as much his, as B
is ling/if“. It is impossible forC, or any other to
see with the eyes of B: therefore they are eyes only
to B: and when they cease to be his 9w, they cease V
to be eye: at all. He then has the sole property in
them, it being impossible in nature, that the eyes
of B should ever be the eyes of C.

Further, the labor of B cannot be the labOr ’of
C: because it is the application of the organs and
powers of B, not of C, to the effecting of somen
thing; and therefore the slalor is as much B’s, as
the limbs and faculties made use of arehis. '

pactionate, or debauched discourse (I510! ivnhfmuec must-"m
e6 13min?" ml 8.17" atom, “making use of the most holy
“name of God, only to fill up the sentencc with”) PH. Jun.

h Ou’J‘lr ultra: 5145'"ng 39m 6: ripu'ic in?! «drain. “Nothing is
“so much our own, as we ourselves are,” Xen.

Again;

236 The REL‘Io'toN’of'NAa'UaE. ‘Sc&.VI.

~ ‘ Again, the mﬁﬂ or produce of the labor of B is
not the effect of the labor of C: and therefore this
eEeét or produce is B’s, not'C’s; as much B’s, as
the labor was B’s and not C’s ‘. Because, what'the
labor of B causes or produces, B produces by his
labor; or it is the product of B by his labor: that
is, it is B’s product, not C’s, or any other’s. And
if C should pretend ’to any property in that, which
B‘ only can truly calligis, he would act contrary to
truth ". '

Lal’cly, there may be wary things, which B may
truly call'his in form: such fen/2, or upon some such
account, as no other can: and to which C has no
more right than D, nor D than F, etc. the property
of which will therefore be in B. Because C has no
more title than D, nor D than -F , 84'. and that, to
which every one bqﬂde: B has an equal title, no one
besides B can have my title to at all 1, their pre-'
tences'mutually balancing and ale/fraying each Other,
'while his only remains. And in this case a final]
matter, being opposed to nothing, will be strong
enough to maintain the claim of B.

i And therefore the produce of a man’s labor is often still
called his labor. So 1921‘ D‘Wl liJ‘s “shangers devour his ~
“labor ,” and LIan 1‘9) 9‘1" “thou shalt eat the labor
" of thine hands;” in Pﬁlm. s9’ al. paﬁm.—Iliadumgae labor
955‘“. “f-Garments which were the labor of the Trg'an wo-
f‘ men.” Vmc. _. ,-

k If B works for another man, who pays him for his work,
or labor, that alters not the case. He may commute them for
money, ‘because they are his.

1 Tangent): S partz' illi paetarum, fir/é iwicmjugulant, at mm
3:: omnibus reﬂet. “Like those Spartan: mentioned by the PC eta,
“who cut one another’s throats, so that not one of them all
" remained,” as Laazmiu: lays in another case.

III.





l‘ ,El'rutbs re/peﬁing Mankind, s9°12 ' 2 3;

. ~ III. Warmer is incoryz'ﬂent with the general peace
and welfare (or good) of mankind, is ,ineonﬁ/tent with
the law: of batman nature, wrong, intolerable. Those
maxims may be efteemd the natural and 'true laws
of any particular society, which are most proper to
procure the lumen: of it. Because happiness is the
end of society and laws: otherwise we might sup-j
pofe unbappinqﬁ to be proposed as the right end of
them; that is, unhappinels to be desirable, con.
trary to nature and truth. And what is said of a
particular society is not less true, when applied to
the universal society of mankind. Now those things
are mo]! apt to produce happiness, which make the
n2on men happy. And therefore those maxims or
principles, which promote the general tranquilb'ty
and well being of mankind, if those words express
the bappz'neﬁ of mankind, must be the true laws
of humanity, or the bacts of them: and all Inch
practices, asinterfere with these, must also inter-,-
fere with those. It is contradictory to say, that any
thing can be a general law of buman nature, which
tends only to favor the pleasures of some particulars
_ to the prejudice of the rest, who partake of the
same common nature; and especially if these plea—
fures are of the lower and orutal kind. As a million
of men are more than one; so in fixing the public
laws of human nature, and what ought to be, or
not to be, they must: in reason be more regarded by
a million of time:: for here we consider men only as
men.

It Will be easy now to ihew, that the tron/greﬂion
of these laws, conducing to the general good of
the world, is wrong and morally evil. For if man-

' i ‘ ' kind

24.0 Toe Reunion of NATURE. Se&.VI.

rent: and their children, and perhaps of some few
Other near relations. Here let me be understood
to mean only those, between whom there is no so-
mily relation (or between whom all family relation
is vanishd). ’ '

In a Rate, where no law: of society make any
fubordination or distinction, men can only be con-
ﬁderd as men, or only as individUals of the same
finder, and equally Iharing in one common deﬁ-
‘ nition '. And since by virtue of this same deﬁni-
tion B is the ﬁzme to C, that C is to B; B has no
more dominion over C than C reciprocally has over
'3: that is, they are in this regard equal.

Perform! excellencies or defects can make no dif-
ference here: because, I . Who must: judge, on which
side the advantage lies? To say B, (or _D, or any

..body else) has a right to judge to the difadvan-
tage of C, is to ﬂoppoﬂ what is in question, aldomi-
nion over him; not to prove it. 2. Great natural
or acquired indowmentr may be privileges to them
who have them: but this does not deprive those,
.who have less, of their title to 'what they have; or,
which is the same, give any one, who has greater,
abilities, a right to take it, or the use of it from
them. If B has better eye: than C, it is well for
him: but it does not follow from this, that C
should not therefore see for himself, “and use his
eyes, as freely as B may his. C’s eyes are accom-
modated by nature to his use, and so are B’s to

.’ Niki] eﬂ. mm uni tam ﬁled/e, tam par, gm)”: meme: inter

: eta/but z'pjo: ﬁemm.—.Qgeetcunq; eﬂ bomini: deﬁnitio, mm in 07mm
. walet. “There is no one thing more like or equal to another,
. “than we all are amongﬁ ourselves.-—-Whatever definition we
I“give of a man, the same will hold good of us all.” Cxc.

his 5



Truth: "ﬂaming Mankind, Co’o. 24!

his; and each has the fole property in his own:
so their respective properties are equal. The case
would‘be parallel tothis, if B ih‘ould happen to
have better intelleAnal faculties than C. And fur-
ther, if B should be stronger'than C, he would not
yet for that reason have any right to be his lord.
For C’s less degree of strength is as much his, as
B’s greater is his: therefore C has as much rig/at
‘ to his, and (which is the natural consequence) to
use his, as. B has to use his: that is, C has as much
right to rqﬂ/i, as B has to impose or command, by
virtue of his strengthz and where’ the rig/at (tho
nor the power) of reliiting is equal to the right of
commanding, the right of commanding or domi-
nion is nothing. 3. Since strength and power are
most apt to pretend a title to dominion ‘, it may
be added further, that power and right, or a power
of doing any thing, and right to do it, are quite
different ideas: and therefore they may be feparat- '
ed, nor does one inferr the Other. Lax/My, if power,
4114‘ power, gives a right to dominion, it gives a
right to every thing, that is obnoxious to it; and
then nothing can be done that is wrong. (For no
body can do any thing which he has not the power
to do.) But this is not only contrary to what has
been proved in feet. I. but to aﬂért it would be to
advance a plain aoﬂtrdirjy or oontradiﬂion rather.

‘ When the Romans, in Liqy, asked the Calls, 25401171472: id
ju: gﬂt, agrum & pqﬂéﬂorz’bm petere, aut mimm' arma, “Where
“is the justice of demanding the lands of the owners or else
“threatening them with the sword;” they answered, ﬂ in ar.
misjusﬁrre, s9’ omniafartium ‘virorum eﬂ’, “that their swords
“were their law, and that valiant men had a right to every
“thing.” Like barbarians indeed!

R For





242 The RELIGION ofNATURE..Se€t.VI.

For then to oppose the man who has this power, as
far as one can, or (which is the same) as far as one
has the power to do it, would not be wrong: and
yet so it musthe, if he has a right to dominion, or
to be not Oppofed. Moreover, that a man should
have a right to any thing, merely because he has
the power to take it, is a doctrine indeed, which
may serve a few tyrants, or some banditti and rogues,
but directly oppofite to the peace and general good
of mankind; and therefore to be exploded, by
prop. III. It is also what the powerful themselves
could not allow, if they would but imagine them-
felves to be in the Rate of the weak and more 21:-
feneelefc; and therefore unreasonable, by prop. IV ‘.

- VI. No man can bane a right to begin to interrupt
the bappz’ney} of emother. Because, in the ﬁrit place,
this supposes a dominion over him, and the most
absolute too that can be. In the next, for B to be-
gin to dif’turb the. peace and happiness of C is
what B would think unreasonable, if he was in C’s
case. In the laﬂr, since it is supposed, that C has
never invaded the happiness of B, nor taken any
thing from him, nor at all meddled with him, but
the wleole Iran/amen begins originally from B (for
all this is couchd in the word éegin), C can‘have
nothing that is B’s; and therefore nothing, to

t yew/m, when he says, "’1‘" 7: pair 0:51:31» m‘ nag? Sup-
tlr ia'xuej'ra'rw, (94‘ any at'v3ey'7roec, ei'xeu v07: J‘umwarlguh
“that it is an eﬁablishd law, and it is the strongelt amongfi
“'both beaﬂs and amongf’t men, rw'z. to submit to them that
“have the melt power,” can only mean, that necessity, or

perhaps prudence, oblige: to do this; not any law in the ﬂrié‘ter
sense of that word. ’

which-



Truth ref/'peﬂing. Mankind, Go. 243

which C has not at least as good a title as B has;
or, ‘in other words, nothing, which C has not as
much right to keep as B to claim. These two rights
being then at leoﬂ equal, and counterpoiﬁng each
other, no alteration in the present slate of things
can follow from any superiority of right in B: and,
therefore it must of right remain as it is; and what
C has must, for any right that B has to oppose this
settlement, remain with C in his nndiﬂnroed pof-
feliion. But the argument is still stronger on the
side of C: because he seems to have such a property
in his own happiness, as is mentioned in prop. II.
soch a one as no other can have “.

VII. Tbo no man can bone a rig/2t to begin to in-
terrupt onother man’s boppinefv, or to burr bim; yet
every man has a right to defend bimﬂlfond In: again/l
violence, to recover what is taken by force from him,
and even to make reprifols, by all Ilse mean: tlmt truth
and prudence permit '. We have seen already, that
there are some things, which a man may truly call
his; and let us for the present only suppose, that
there may be more. This premifed, -I proceed to
make good the proposition.

To deny a man the privilege mentioned in it is to
assert, contrary to true/.7, either that he loo: not the

° ' S oeietati: [inter nomines] arﬂiﬁmum ruineu/um s/1 magi: ar-
oz'trari we contra ndturam, bominern borninz' detrabere, fui com-
modi tau/a, gua‘rn omnia inromrnoda/itéire, etc. “The firongeﬁ
“bond of society amongst: men is, to think that it is more
-“contrary to nature, for one man to take away that which
“belongs to another, to advantage himself, than it ispto un-
“d‘ergo all the inconveniences that can be, 55c.” Crc.

‘7 All this is supposed to be in a Rate of nature and‘the ab-
fence of human laws.

R z ‘ faculties





244 The RELIGION of NATURE. Seét.VI.

faculties and powers, which he has; or that the:
Author of nature has given them to him in vain.
For to what end has he them, if he may not a]?
them ?‘ And how may he use them, if not for his
own preﬁ'rvatian, when he is attackd, and like to
be abufcd, or perhaps deltroyd ?

All animals have a principle of fey—prq/ewation,

. which exerts itself many times with an uncontroul—
able impetuoiity. Nature is unzfirm in this, and
every where conftant to itself. Even inanimate bo-
dies, when they are acted upon, react. And one
may be sure, that no poﬁtion can have any foun-
dation in nature, or be consistent with it and truth
(those inseparable companions), which turns upon
nature itself, and tends to it: deﬂruﬁion. .

Great part of the general happiness of mankind
depends upon those means, by which the innocent.
may be saved from their cruel invaders: among-
which the opportunities they have of defending
themselves may be reckoned the chief. Therefore
to debar men of the use of these opportunities,
and the right of defending themselves against: inju-
rious treatment and violence must be inconsistent
with the laws of nature by prop. III.

If a man has no right to defind himself and what
is his, he Can have no right to any thing (the con-
trary to which has been already in part, and will
by and by be more amply proved); since that can-
not be his right, which he may not maintain to be
his right. A

If a man has no right to define! himself against
infults, £976. it must be because the aggreﬁ'or has a
right to ajail the Other, and ufmp what is his: but
this pretension has been prevented in the forego-

ing

X

Truth: rcfpcﬁing Mankind, 69%. 24 5

ing proposition. And, more than that, it includes
a great absurdity, to commence an injury, or to begin
the violence, being in nature more than only to
repel! it. He, who begins, is the true cause of all
that follows: and whatever falls upon him from
' the oppolition made by the defending party, is but
the effect of his own act: or, it is that violence,
of which he is the author, rcy‘leﬂed back upon him-
self. It is as when a man fpits at heaven, and the
fpittle falls back upon his own face.

Since he, who begins to violate the happiness of
another, does what is wrong, he, who endeavors
to obviate or put a stop to that violence, does in
that respect what is right, by the terms.

Laffly, since every man is obliged to consult his
own happiness, there can be no doubt but that he
not only may, but even ought to. defend it (feet. II.
prop. IX); in such a manner I mean, as does not
interfere with truth ", or his own design of being
happy. He ought indeed not to act rel/My, or do
more than the end proposed requires: that is, he
ought by a prudent carriage and wife forecaft to
ihut up, if be can, the avenues by which he may be
invaded; and when that cannot be done, to use ar-
guments and perfuaﬁves, or perhaps withdraw out
of the way of harm: but when these measures are
ineffectual or impracticable, he must take such
other as he can, and confront force with force.
Otherwife he will fail'in his duty to himself, and
deny happiness to be happiness.

1: 'For e3 6 «fine?! x235: 0-0117,; n'rrmotaiir 31:5: s'J‘ir grin arm? u-
n‘ic, xav imam, “if he who does an act ofinjultice does an

a in thing, he that returns the injustice, does a thing equally
9 ill, tho it be by way of retaliation.” Max. Tm.

R3 .By





24,6 Tire RELIGION ofNATURE. Se&.VI.

By the same means, that a man may defend what
is his, he may certainly endeavor to recover what
has been by any kind of violence or villainy taken-
from him. For it has been lhewn already, that the
power to take any thing from another gives no
rig/l7! to it. The right then to that, which has been
taken from its owner against his will, remains still
where it was: he may still truly call it his: and if
it be lair, he may use it as his: which if he who
took, it away, or any other, .shall hinder him from
doing, that man is even here the aggreﬂbr, and
the owner does but defend himself and what is his.
Besides, he, who uses any thing as his, when it is
his, acts on thesede of truth: but that man, who
Oppofes him in this, and consequently asserts a
right to that, which is not his, acts contrary to
truth. The former therefore does what’icannot be
amiss: but what the latter does, is wrong by that
fundamental proposition, feet. I. prop. 1V.

Then further, if a man has still arigibt to what
is forceably or without his consent taken from
him, he must have a right to the value of it. For
the thing is to him what it is in value to him: and
the right he has to it, may be considered as a right
to a thing. ofsuch a value. So that if the very thing
which was taken be defiroyd,or cannot be retrieved,
the pmprietor neverthelefs retains his right to a
thing offaeb a value to him; and something must
be had in lieu of it: that is, he has a right to make
repréfals. Since every thing is to every man what
it is in value to him, things of the same value to
any one may be reckoned as to him the same, and
to recover the equivalent the same as to recover
the Ming izfelf: for otherwise it is not an equiva-

' lent.

Truth: reﬂet‘ting Mankind, Be. 247

lent. If the thing taken by way of reprifal should
be to the manrfrom whom it isgtaken, of greater
value than what he wrongfully took from the re-
coverer, he must: charge himself with that loss. If
injustice be done him, it is done by himself, the
other has no more than what he has a right to. To
which add, that as a man has a right to recover
what is his, or the equivalent, from an invader; so
he seems for the same reasons to have a right to an
equivalent for the expenje he is at in recovering his
_ own, for the loss of time and quiet, and for the
trouble, hazards, and danger: undergone: because
all these are the effects of the invaﬁon, and there-
fore to be added to the invader’s account.

VIII. 7' he ﬁat poﬂéﬂion of a thing give: the pof-
feﬂor a greater right to it, than any other man has,
or can have, till he and all, that claim under him, are
extinl'z‘. For, I . till then no other man can be the ﬁr/t
poﬁeﬂor again: which is, more than nothing; since
he comes into it by God’s providence, and as it
were donation. 2. That, which no man has yet any
title to ’, the finder may take without the viola-
tionof any truth. He does not day that to be an-
other man’s, which is another man’s: he does
not hegin to "interrupt the happiness of any body,
656. Therefore to poITefs himselfof it is not wrong.
So far from it, that, since every man is ohlzgea’ to
consult his own happiness (that is, his own interei’c
and advantages, whenever he can do it without

Y Nan: proprie telluri: her-an: natura neg; illum, Nee me, nee
quenguarnﬂatuit. “For nature did not make him, nor me, nor
“any one else, the owner of any particular piece of land."
H OR.

R 4. the



248 The RELIGION of NATURE. Se&.VI.

the violation of truth) not to act confonantly to
this allegation is an omiﬁion that would be wrong.
What he does therefore is right. And then if he
does right in taking poﬁ‘eﬂion of it, he must: from
thence be the rigblful poﬁﬂbr -, or, it'becomes his.
3. .There are many things, which cannot be pof-

fell: without cultivation and the contrivance and
labor of the first poffeffor. This has generally been
the case of lands: and these are indeed more emi-

nently meant by the word poﬁﬂion's. Now to de-

prive a man of the fruit of his man cares and

fweat, and to enter upon it, as if it was the effect

of the intruder’s pains and travel, is a most mani-

feﬁ: violation of truth. It is afferting in fact that

.to be, his, which cannot be his. See prop. II.
4. The contrary doctrine, viz. that prime occupant)!

gives no right, interferes with prop. III. for it

must certainly be inconﬁf’tent with the peace and

bappz’mfc of mankind in general to be left in end-

less wars and struggles for‘that, which no man can

ever have any right to. And yet thus‘it must be

if that doctrine was true: because it has been de-

monﬁrated, that power confers no right; and there-

fore the ﬁeﬂ right to many things can only accrue

from the ﬁrf’c poffeflion of them. 5. If B should

endeavor by force (or fraud) to eject C out of the

poITeIIion of any thing, which C enjoys, and ob-

taind without expelling or diAnrlz’ng any body, he

would certainly do that, which he himself would

judge unmet/enable, were he in C’s place. There-
fore he acls, as if that was not reason with respect to
C, which would be reason in respect of B; con~

' trary to the nature of reel/en, and to prop. 1V.
6. To endeavor to turn a man violently out of his
' polfef-

Trutbs respecting Mankind, 55c. 249

poiTeﬁions is the same as to command him to leave
them, upon pain of suffering for non-obedience.
But this is usurping a dominion, which he has no
right to; and is contrary to prop. V. 7. No man
can expel] another out of his poﬂ‘eﬂion without
beginning to interrupt his h'appinefs: nor can any
one do this without contravening the truth con-
taind in prop. VI. .This therefore fecures the pot:-
feﬂ‘or in his poﬁ‘eﬂion for ever: that is, it confirms
his right to the thing poﬂ'eit. Lo/ily, the first pof-
feﬂor, of whom I have been speaking, has undoubt-
edly a right to defend his per/on, and such other
things as can only be his, againi‘t the attempts of
any aggreﬂ'or (see prop. 11.): therefore these no
one can have a right to violate. And therefore
again, if he cannot be forecany difpoﬂ‘eﬁ without
violence oﬂ'erd to they}, no one has any right to
difpoﬂ'efs him. But this must be the case, where
the poITeﬁbr does not quit his poﬂeﬂion willingly.
The right consequently must remain solely in him,
unless he confents to quit it.

N. The ﬂiccwjor: of an invader, got into pof-
feﬂion wrongfully, may acquire a right in time 2,
‘ by the failure of such, as might claim under him
who had the right. For he, who happens to be in
pofiemon, when'all these are extinct, is in the place
of a prime occupant.

'5 Tic twain-m, mi 1-13: Mia::33 case not"): in imﬁvnau can}:
7 1,9510, noel“194‘ owl-price ion" at Jun ropifao'n. “They think,
“that poﬂ'cﬂions, whether private or public, after they have
“continued for a long time, are fecure, and belong to the so-
“mily.” Isocx.

IX. A

250‘ The RELIGION quATUinE. Se&.VI.

‘ IX. '14 title to many things may be trang‘erred by
campast or donation 3.” If B has the fole right in
lands, or goods, no body has any right to the dif-
pofal of them belides B: and' he has a right. For
disposing of them is but using them as his. There-
fore‘ the act of B in exebangz'ng them for‘some thing
else, or ldtewing them upon C, interferes not with
trutl): and so B does nothing that is wrong. Nor
does C do any thing against truth, or that is wrong,
in taking them: because he treats them as being
what, tiny are -, as things, which come to him by
'the act of that person, in whom is lodged the fole
power of diﬁvqﬁng of them. Thus C gets the title
innocently.

But in the case of eampast the reason, on which
this tranfaction (lands, is more evident liill. For
the contractors are supposed to receive each from
other the equivalent of that which they part with,
or at leall what is equivalent to them rte/joeﬁively,
or perhaps by each party pneferalle. Thus neither
of them 'is hurt: perhaps both advantaged. And
lo each of them treats the thing, which he receives
upon the innocent exchange, as being what it is:
better for him, and promOting his convenience and
happiness. Indeed“he, who receives the value of
any thing, and what he likes as well, in effect has
it stil}. His property is not diminished: the situation
and matter ofit is only altered. ‘

a To this may be reduced that title to things, which Tillb
mentions as conferred by some law (lege);_ and even those,
which a‘ccrue eorzditiene, “by covenant, ” or ﬁrte, “by lot.”

For I fup'pofe the government to have a right of giving them
thus.

Man-



Truth: rq/peﬂing Mankind, €9’e.‘ 25x

Mankind could not well subsist without hartering
one thing ibr anorher: therefore whatever tends
to take away the benefit of this intercourse, is in-
consistent with the general good of mankind, Es’e.
If a man could find the neeeﬂizrie: of life without
it, and by himself, he must at least want many of
the comfort: of it.

X. T here is then such a thing as property, founded
in nature and truth ": or, there are things, which one
man only can, eon/iﬂentty with nature and truth, call
his: by prop. II, VIII, IX. ‘.

5 Which must not give way to the opinions ofﬁtneﬁ, etc.
The master was in the right, who correéted Gym: for adjudg-
ing the great coat to the great boy, and the little one to the
little. He was not a; drp6¢7on@‘ anemic: “a judge of the fit—
f‘ ness,” but of the property. Cranium, one: in homimtm doéhorum
dzAntatione «verﬁzntur, nihil eﬂ prtﬂ’ﬂo pr¢ﬂahilim, gua‘m plan}
intelligi no: adjustitiam sﬂ} nator, neque opinione, fed naturz'i con-

stirutum sﬁr/'14:. “Of all the things that learned men dispute

“about, there is none better than this, that we should be tho-
“roughly convinced, that we were born to do what is right,
_“and that right is not made by opinion but by nature.” C IC.

° There is another way of acquiring a title mentioned:
which is, by the right of war, as it is called. Sun! jar-imam nulla
nature?: fed an: ‘veteri occupatione, at gm' quandam in «master toe—
nerunt; ant miétorié', at qni hello potitz' jitnt, etc. “Nothing
“belongs to particular persons by nature: but either by long
“peli'eﬂion, aswhen men, a long while since, came into lands
“which had no owners; or else by viﬂory, as they who en;
“joy them from war, s5}.” CIC. And so in Xenophon it is
said to be an eternal law among men, that if a city be taken
.in war, the bodies and goods of the people in it are the con-
‘queror’s; and they may poﬂ'efs them as ‘their own, nor «Inc’-
‘78“: “as belonging to others.” But sure this wants limi-
tations.

x1. Those



;252 722:: RELIGION OfNATURE. Seé‘t.VI.

XI. Too/o wings, whicb only one man can tmly
and properly call his, must remain his, till he agrees to
part with them (if they are facb, as be may part with)
'oy oompal‘? or donation; or (which must: be under-
ﬂood) till they fail, or death extinguishes him and
his title together, and he delivers the lamp to his.
next man. Becaqu no one can deprive him of them
without his approbation, but the depriver must: use
.them as lair, when they are not bit, in contradié‘tion
to trot/o. For,

XII. To have the property of any thing. and to
loam the fole right of using ana' diﬁvoﬂng of it are
the same thing: tiny are eqaipollont expressedonr. For
when it is said, that P has the property, or that
such a thing is proper to P, it is not said, that
P and Q or P and others have the property
(proprz'nm limits the thing to P only): and when
any thing is said to be bit, it is not said that
part of it only is his. P has therefore the all or
tall-hood d of it, and consequently all the use of
it. And then, since the all of it to him, or all that

P can have of it, is but the ufo and dzﬂofal of it ’,
e " he

3 Allodz'am, “Freehold.”

'3 fundam- iyémn mam: a’va'ylvolnm Andante '5 J‘s?“[air Exam
an‘w J‘nn'anian wit a’yeﬁv,; vii; claim, only all xpiio’tr iM@'. ﬂa'mc yqu
rniv xpio’n 3x05", J‘wnomlav J'i tibia—19 ino’wac,  inert-0c 50 '75 ﬂ-
aws-3“: waggxapiooyuu irrigm, 'nir xgﬁo’n xagnaaalyunot pa’vor. “I
“have often-times lau’ghd, when I read any of those wills, in
“which it is said, let such or such an one be the real owner of
“the lands or houses; and let another person have the use of
“them; for the use is all that belongs to any of us, we are not
“the real owners.--After death they go to others, whether we

7‘ will or no, when we have enjoyd the use only.” 5.0mm.
Thai



Truth: rejpeﬂing Mankind, Es’e. 2; 3

he who has this has the thing itself, and it is his ‘.

Laws indeed have introduced a way of speak-
ing, by which the property and the ufufrue‘} are dif-
tinguifhd; but‘in truth the ufufrué‘tuary has a
temporary or limited property; and the proprietary
has a perpetual ufufruét, either at present, or in re—
verﬁon. Propriety without the use (if the use is never
come to the prOprietary) is an empty found,

I have before upon some occasions taken it as.
granted, that he, who uses any thing as his, when.
it is not his, acts againit truth, etc. but now I say
further, that,

XIII. He, wba use: or di/pa/e: of any thing, does
by that declare it to be his. Because this is all, that

Tia-m sa}! Qu’cu a’J‘u‘c ic/ur zu’ecot, 16/49 ﬂ agitation? In}! xpﬁrn duo'-
v57 Ii: 1363:?” vagupﬁt’nwu, «Shyoxdmt «ll-Medea: ropefépsﬁg
agiz'ed'a‘r innate/aid. capixﬁy Irunxau'Ia-a 01.527453! my daroaau’er
«i? arépwr©u “We are not by nature the real owners of any of
“these things, bit are inveﬁed by law or by succession with
“the nfe of them for an uncertain time, and are therefore
“called temporary tenants; and when the time prescribed is
“pail, then they go to another, and he enjoys the same title):
ch. ,

f Qui te pa/Z‘it ager, tum gﬂ, “The field that maintains you,
“is your field, ﬁfe.” Horace, alluding to this truth. met Gav.
wa‘r. “As to the matter of injuries,” says Plato, iv cigioSa re:-
ers I“we 14pm” finale» 059' «a?! «lakes-310v pnﬁm yﬁirpipm [anti
J7me “there is only some such general law as this for every 7
“man, wiz. that no man should plunder, or by violence take
“any thing that belongs to another 2” and then proceeds, mm
«31956341 puJ‘iu we?! «:9 crime, ia‘r pr} inlay vrc‘v auanyirov, an.
“nor make any use of any thing that comes in their way,
“without the leave of the owner.” In Plutareb the thing is
carried farther: where it is said, that a man passing by another
man’s door ought pul mire" slow,:0». “ought not to look in;”‘
according to a saying omeaa-am, 5t»le their“!; 'ﬂ‘c 054'“i
«'8‘; épﬁaMas‘; oi: duos-elm Gelatin! “Sim, “there is no difference
ff betwixt looking in, and going into another man’s house.”

he,







254. The RELIGION ofNA'runn. Seét. VI.

he, whose it really is, can do. Borrowing and bin'ng
afford no objection to this. When the borrower or
hirer ‘uses the thing borrowd or' hired, he uses what
is bit own for the time allowed: and his doing so is
only one of those ways, in which the true proprietary
disposes of it. '

XIV. To uﬁtrp or invade the property of another
man is iiy'ujiiee: or, more fully, to take, detain, 'u/E,
def/troy, hurt, or meddle *5 wit/.2 any thing that is his
without his allowance, either by force or fraud or my
other way, or even to attempt orgy of tire/e, or aﬁﬂ.
them, who do, are ail: of iiy'u/liee. The contrary; to
render and permit quietly to every one robot 1': bit, is

justice. Def.

XV. He tlvat would not violate trutlz, must avoid
all injustice: or, all irgjustice is wrong and evil. It in-
terferes with the truths “here before laid down,
and perhaps more." It denies men to be fuh’eﬁ:
capable of diﬁinét properties: in some cases it de-
nies them to have a property even in their own
ladies, life, same, and the like: the practice of it is
incompatible With the peace and [rapping/3 of man-
kind: it is what every man thinks unreasonable in
bi: own case, when the injury is done to himself:

z Furtam fit,---cum gai: alienam rem invite domino contreétat.
“It is real theft—to meddle with any thing that belongs to
“another against: his will.” JUST. by}.

b On the contrary DEN npr—m Hilly!» “We shall
“make justice, we shallmake truth.” A saying of 5'3”:
“Raéoi jig/baa}: the son of Leroi.” And Cicero more than once
uses the word met-um “true ” for juAnm “just," and wee-it‘s

. ff truth“for bonito: “goodness” or prooita: “probityﬂf

1°.





Truth: reﬂeﬁing Mankind, Co’c. 2 55

.to take any thing from another only because I'
think I. want it, or because I have power to take it,
and will have it, without any title to it, is the
highest pretence to dominion, and denial of our na-
tural equality: it is fetting up a right to begin to
diAnrb the happiness of Others: and lastly, it is to
deny there is any such thing as property, contrary to
truth.

Briefly, if there be any thing which P can truly
and properly call bit, then, if T takes or uses' it
without the consent of P, he declares it to be his
(for if it was his he could do no more) when it is
not his, and so acts a lie ‘: in which consistzs the
idea and formal ratio of moral evil.

The very attempting any instance of injusttice, or
aﬂﬂing others in such an attempt, since it is at-
tempting and promoting what is wrong, is being
in the wrong as much as one is able to be; or do-
ing what one can to atchieve that which is evil:
and to do this, by the terms, must be wrong and
evil. I

Even the deyz‘re of obtaining any thing unjustly
is evil: because to desire to do evil, by the terms
again, is an evil or criminal desire. If the act fol—

1 Account «a «61 (£570! to" 97m, 'To‘ 1‘) duh-gov, o'n'omp i9», «'15,.
alfrem: “that only your own, which really is so; and look up-
“on that as another’s, which really is so." Epii‘tetm‘s words.
yustirie: primum mum“eﬂ, at 7:: mi 914i: noceat, niﬁ lace/1h: in-
[aria; (seirzde, at (mohuniou: pro communion: utatur, primati: at
fair. “The first property of justice is, that no man should do
“any hurt to another, unless provoked by some injury; after
“this, he is to make use of those things that are common, in
“common with others, and use the things that belong to him-
“[elf as .his own.” C 1C. This is to ufc things as being what
they are. .

g loWs



256 The RELIGION ofNA'rURE. SeéhVI.

lows such a delire, it is the child and product of it:
and the delire, if any thing renders the fulfilling of
it impracticable, is the act obﬂ'ruéted in the begin-
ning, and ﬁiﬂed in the womb.

Let it be observed here by way of febolion con-
cerning the thing called covetoufneﬁ, that there
seem to be three forts of it. One is this‘here men-
tiond: a desire of getting from others, tho it be
my'u/ily. This is wrong and wicked. Another is
an immense delire of heaping up what one can by
just: methods, but without any reasonable end pro-
pofed ", and only in order to keep ‘, and as it were
bury it In: and the more he accumulates, the more
he craves ". This also encroaches' upon truth, and
seems to be a vice. But to covet to obtain what is
another man’s by ju/l means, and with his consent,
.when it may contribute to the happinef's of our-
felves or families, and perhaps of the other person
too, has nothing surely that looks unfriendly upon

I! Blep/z'a;; Jams-5:. "‘ the ufurer,” in Lucian, dies of hunger
(MM? «‘S'M@' Nym «mammals “the miserable wretchis re- '
“ported to have pined’away till he died "). Ridiculous enough.

' Or only we}: ‘73 Q‘s/“7': “to be perpetually telling it
.“over,” as Anacbaryf: said of some Greek. ATHEN.

“1 As that man, in zit/mum, indeavourd literally to do;
of whom it is reported, that, being much in love with his mo-
ney, before he died he fwallowed as much of it as he could
(unearthed. 8'; 5Mch you": six-030077, “he fwallowed a great
“many pieces of gold and then died ”).

1‘ Of such it is, that Diogenes used to say, ‘Opolsc 'rx‘c "land’s:
«7; 13529331107” xx. “That covetous men were like men that
“had the dropfy.” Swan. The Mam/bilim, that is, “the
“writers of proverbs,” mentioned in Nab/a. Ab. compare them
nnwiw any ‘73 u crm‘mn mono nnwiw mosh
nag Qﬁm‘. “to thirliy people drinking salt water, the more
ff they drink, the drier they are.”,

truth.



Truth: nfpeﬁz'ng Mankind, Cs’c. » “2'57.

truth, or is blameable in it. This, if it may be
called covetoufnefs, is a virtuous oovetouﬁze/i.

XVI. When a man care: not what fuﬂerings he
master: to others, and eﬁmially if he delight: in other
men’: ﬁzﬂ‘ering: and makes" them his fport, this is
who: I call cruelty. And not, to he ofeﬂed with the -
ﬁeferings of other people, the they proceed not from
us, hut from others, or from master: in which we are
not ~concemol, is unmercifulneﬁ. More) and humanity
are the re‘verﬁ‘ of these.

XVII. He, who relzgz'ozgfly regard: truth and no;
tare, will. not only he not my'zeﬂ, hut (more) not un-
mercz'ful, and much le/i cruel. Not to be affected
with the aﬁiﬂiom of others, To far as .we know
them, and in proportion to the several degrees
andcircumstances of them, tho we are not the
causes of them, is the same as to consider the 3f.
ﬂiéted as persons not in afﬂiction; that is, as being
not what they are, or (which is the same) as being
what they‘ are not: and this contradicts matter of
faﬂ. *

One can scarce know the suffering: of another
without having at least some image of them in his
mind: nor can one have these images without be-
ing conscious of them, and as it were feeling them.
Next to soffering itself is to carry the representa-
tion of it about with one. So that he, who is not
affected with the calamities of Others, To far as they
fall within his knowledge, may be said to know
and not to know; or at least to cancel his know-g
ledge, and contradict his own conscience.

S - i There

258 sbeR'ELIGION ofNA'nunn. Se€t.VI..

There is something in human nature ° resulting
from our very make and constitution, while it re-
tains its genuine form, and is not altered by vicious
habits; not perverted by transports of revenge or
fury, by ambition, company, or false philosophy P;
nor oppreﬁ by stupidity and neglecting to observe
what happens to others: I say, there is something,
which renders us obnoxious to the pains of others,
causes us to sympathize with them, and almost com-
prehends us in their case. It is grievous to see or
hear (and almost to hear of) any man, or even any
animal whatever, in torment. This eompaﬁon ap-
pears eminently in them, Who upon other accounts
are justly reckoned amongl’t the be]! of mm ‘1: in
some degree it appears in almq/i all; nay, even

0 Preperly called Manny; because nothing of it appears
in brutes. nman 1933 nwtmm mnpn ﬂJ‘N mm.
“for brutes have no concern or uneasiness at their companions
“being in pain.” S.HHA8.

. P When Seneca says, Clementiam—ome: 6071i pne/iabunt, mi-
fericordiam autem witabzmt, “all good men should show mild—
.“ness, but avoid showing pity,” he seems only to quibble.
He has many other weak things upon this fubj eft. That (fen;
tence) ﬁzecurret [/hpiem] alieni: lacquir, nan accedet, “a wife
“man will relieve a person in tears, but not cry himself,”
owns one use of tears: they obtain fuccour even from a Stair.

q ’AyaSoi delléxpm ird‘pu- “Good men are very apt to sbed
“tears.” They, who of all writers undertake to imitate na-
ture most, oft introduce even their heroes weeping. (See how
Homer represents Ulyﬂe: 0d. 6. I 51,—2,—7,—8.) The tears
of men are in truth very different from the cries and ej ulations
of children. They are ﬁle»: firearm, and ﬂow from other
causes; commonly some tender, or perhaps philosophical, re-
ﬂexion. It is easy to see how hard hearts and dry eyes come.
to be fashionable. But for all that, it is certain the glandule:
larg'rlealer, “the glands WC use when we cry," are not made
for nothing.

v ' some-



Trath re/ﬁming Mankind, 65?. ‘ 2‘59

sometimes, when they more coolly attend to things,
in those hardened and execrable man/ten of cruelty
themselves, who seem just to retain only the least
tincture of humanity that can be. The Pbenean ty-
rant, who had never wept over any of those mur-
ders he had caused among his own citizens, wept
when he law a tragedy but acted in the theatre ‘:
the reason was, his attention was caught here, and
he more observed the sufferings of Hecaba 'and Au-
dromacbe, than ever he had those of the Pbemfaas;
and more impartially, being no otherwise concerned
in them but as a common fpeétator. Upon this oc-
caﬁon the principle of campaction, implanted in hu.
:man nature, appeard, overcame his habits of cruel-
ty, broke through his petrifaction, and would show
that it could nor be totally eradicated. It is there-
fore according to nature to be affected with the
sufferings of other people: and the contrary is in-
‘lmman and unnatural.

Such are the circumﬂame: of mankind, that we
cannot (or but very few of us, God knows) make
. our way through this world without encountering
danger: and fuffering many evil:: and therefore
since it is for the good of such, as are so exposed
or actually fmarting under pain or trouble, to re-
ceive comfort and aﬂiftance from others, without'
which they must commonly continue to be mifer‘a-
able, or perish, it is for the common good and
welfare of the majorigy at lea/l of mankind, that
they should compaﬁonatc and kelp each other ‘. To

* Plat.

' A generous nature pities even an enemy in difirefs. 'Erm-
«agar. m Au’rnnr fpmb admp 3mm Juqaui. “I always pity a.
“man in misery, altho he be my enemy.” Sow.

' S 2 do

'260 The RELIGION of NATUR a; Seét.VI

do the contrary must therefore be contrary 'to mf-
ture and wrong by prop. III. And beside, it is by
one’s behavior and actions to affirm, that the cir-
cumf’tances of‘m'en in this world are not what they
are; or that peace, and health, and happiness, and
the like, are not what tbqy are. ‘

Let a man fubstirute himself into the room of
some poor creature dejected with invincible pover-
ty, diﬁracted with difficulties, or groaning under
the pangs of some disease, or the anguifh of some
hurt or wound, and without help abandond to want
and pain. In this diltrefs what reflexions can he
imagine be fboald have, if he found that every body
neglected him, no body so much as pitying him,
or vouchfaﬁng to take notice of his calamitous and
sad condition 9 It is certain, that what it would be
reasonable or unreasonable for others to do in re-
fpeél: of him, he must allow to be reasonable or un-
reasonable for him to do in respect of them, or
deny a manifel’t truth in prop. IV.

If unmercifulnefs, as before defined, be wrong,
no time need to be fpent in proving that cruelty is .
so. For all that is culpable in unmercifulnefs, is
contained in cruelty, with addition: and aggrava-
tiom. Cruelty not only denies due regard to the
sufferings of others, but waft: them; or perhaps
deling in them, and (which is .the most infolent
and cruel of all cruelties) makes them a just and
subject of raillery. If the one be a deﬁtt of huma-
nity, the other is diametrically opposite to it ‘. If

t E/i‘ Laminar» nature, yuan ﬁgw' 1136:2111“, maxim? inimim

trudelﬂas. “Cruelty is the most contrary that can‘be to human
ff nature, which we ought to follow.” Crc.

the

Truth: reﬂeﬂing Mankind, Ge. 26 t

the one does no good, the other does much evil.
And no man, how cruel soever in reality he was,
has ever liked to be rec/toad a cruel man: such a
confeliion of guilt does nature extort; so univer-
fall y does it rejeét, condemn, abhor this character.

XVIII. The prac‘iice of jnjiice and mercy “is juji a:
right, as injaﬂice, unmercifulmft, and cruelty are
.‘wrong. This follows from the nature of ‘contraries.
Beside, not to be just to a man is to be not just, or
unjust to him: and so not to be merciful is to be
unmerciful, or perhaps cruel.

. Here I might end this feé‘tion: but perhaps it
may not be improper to be a little more particular.
Therefore,

XIX. From the foregoing propcyition: may he de-
duced the heinoufne/i of all fach crimes, as murder, or
wen hurting the person of another ary how, when
our own neceﬂhty defence does not require it (it being
not possible, that any thing should be more hit,
than his own person, life and limbs); rohhing, jt‘eal-
ing, cheating, hetraying; defamation, detraﬁion, des-
ﬁling the bed of another man, at not. with all the ap-
. proache: and tendencies to them. For these are not
only compride within the definition of injustice,
and are therefore violations of those truths, which
are violated by that; but commonly, and some of
them always, come within the description of crnel/y
too. All which is evident at first light with refpecl;
to murder, .robbery, cheating, ﬂandering, 66c.
especially if a man brings himself into the case,
and views himself in his own imagination as ren-
derd scandalous by calumgiators and lyers; ﬁrilpt

' 3. Y

'262 The RELIGION of NATURE. Se&.VL

by thieves; mind in his fortunes and undone by
knaves; struggling to no purpose, convulsed and
agonizing under the knife of some twenlent ruf-
ﬁan; or the like.

The same is altogether as plain in the case of
adultery “, when any one " ensnares, and corrupts
the wife of another; notwithstanding the protec-
tion it gains from false notions, great examples ‘,
and the commonness of the crime 3'. F or_(the na-
ture of matrimony being for the present supposed
to be such, as it will appear by and by to be) the
adulterer denies the property a husband has in his
, wife by compact, the most express and sacred that
can possibly be made: he does that, which tends
to subvert the peace of families, confounds rela-
tion, and is altogether incon‘ﬁﬁent with the order
and tranquilliry of the world, and therefore with
the laws of human namre: he does what no man
in his wits could think reasonable, or even tolerable,
were he the person wrongd z: briefly, he impu-

' dently

t

u Amo‘v pic; shim-re, a’M‘ 8'; he 0':; peak. “A thief is a bar.
“rid creature, but not so bad as an adulterer." Cnnrs.

7 One of the Sqoﬁjore: alienarw’n mtrimoniorum, “them
“that lie in wait for other men‘s Wives,” as they are calld in
Valeria: Maximm. ‘

3 Palm» apparet, adlmr estate Diwi Hierotgymi adulterim ea-
ﬁte folere pam'rz': 2mm magnatum [afar  ‘-‘ It is very manifeﬁ
“that, in the time of St 7erom, adultery was puniﬂtd with
“death: but now it is the sport of great men.” Scbolz'aﬂ on
St JEROM.

r F or hence follows impunity, Es’c. )pDQ D‘QNJD u‘mm
D‘WDT'I DVD. “From the overﬂowmg of it, the adulterous
“derive bitter waters.” MW.

2 1:, M Ital/in: 220}: more»: concupifcz't,---idmi uxoremfuam af-
pr'ci not: ewe/I: s9’ fdei acerrimu: excessor, of} [mwa: & men-

dacia



Truth: reffectz’ng Mankind, £55. 26 g

dently treats a woman as 171': own woman (or wife a‘),
who is not his, but (mother’s, contrary to jzg/iice,
truth and fat? ". Nor is this limple injustzice only,
but injultice, for which 213 reparation can be made
if the injured man thinks so; as hegenerally does
(see fec’t. II. prop. I. obf. 4.) injustice accompanied
with the greatest cruelty; so complicated, as scarce
any other can be. The big/baud is for ever robbed
of all that pleasure and fatisfaction, which arises
from the wife’s ﬁdelity and affection to him ‘; pre-
fuming upon which he took her to be not only.
the partner of his bed, but the companion of his
life, and sharer in all his fortunes ‘: and into the

dacia pwfeguitur, ip/é pajama. “He Who desires every other
"‘ man‘s wife—-—will not have his own looked upon; and is very
“strié‘t' with other men to keep their word, but breaks his
“own; prosecutes others for Mug, 7 and is perjured himself."
SEN. - ‘ ‘ '

a anJN: 'niv iawq'i yum'i'u. “His own Wife."

1' What a monﬁer in nature must he be, who, as if it was
meritorious to dare to act against all these, (to use Seneca’s words
again) ﬁztisjqﬂam can/am putat amandi, quad aliena q? [uxar] f
“Who thinks it a sufficient reason to be in love with her, be-
“cause she is another man‘s wife.”

c ' can ya) «fw’ Ins-n simi'r, a‘c vro‘ tripe mm hep-Selpwau ﬁr ,uu-
xwopinc yuruu‘e, law oi lei «ms» 0311171,; 4.9903 056 «5 “(pm-9'
tic inwde iS-lfwau, [shun/air. min-a 1-96on dworpiow-S'au, a}
(aw-£1 vro‘r infer 9‘ se701 air it J‘mir, ii «3 p7:@' imd‘dxrurro Antonin.
amt. “For we may not only affirm, that the body of an adul.
“terous woman is not all that is corrupted; but if we would
“speak the truth, that her mind is more habitually alienated
“(from her husband) than her body; for she is taught to have.
“an utter averﬁon and hatred to him, and it is no wonder if
‘F she shows her hatred in public." PH. Jun.

4 Marriage is tartaric. mine: «5 ﬂim—oiatuwig t9 pdfm 4-51 in.
am [anyway], “the partaking equally of every thing in life
“more freely and familiarly, than in any Other (focic-
“ty)." Isocn.



S 4; ‘ ‘ room



'964. The RELIGION of NATURE Sea-VI-

room of them succeed painful and deﬁruétive pail
ﬁons. The poor woman ° herfelf, tho the may be
deluded ‘, and not Ike at present her guilt, or the
consequences of it, usually pays dear for her fecu-
rity and want of guard, the husband becoming
cold; and averse to her, and the full of. apprehen-
ﬁons and fears “, with a particular dread of his fur-
ther refentment. And their aﬁ'airr, in this disjointed
and diﬁracted condition, are neglected; innocent
cbz'ldren ﬂighted, and left unprovided for, Without:
so much as the comfort of any certain relations to
pity them‘ ‘, etc. ' . '

The adulterer may nut be permitted to extenua
ate his crime by such impertinentﬂmile’s and ra-.
kish talk, as are commonly used for that purpose ‘2

‘ When

0 'Aniarg'au. “The soft creature.” St Baa.

f "Brant. 556805449. “over-persuaded-and enticed," says the
penitent woman in Sopboc/er. PLUT. ‘ -

8 1’0de ownyAIcpaeruvi unreal fderQ'. “A cold embrace
“—to have a lewd woman for a wife,” Sour.

1‘ .2412 mint/211w s/1 mu/ierz', anti/a pudicitia:9 “What else
“can be fafe, when the woman has loll her modelly i" Lrvr.

i Oi (all! Mannie“cat-31m an?!» pad” ‘1'“? him aponquﬂiu'nu.

. J‘ma’mm, (Mi ea 76 «ii yu'pawe', mi 'u «q? 45 mrxii.‘ “The mifer.
“able children, who have done no body any injury, will not
“be owned by any relations, either of the married person or of
“the adulterer.” PH. JUD.

1‘ Such as ArMippm uses to Diogenes, 4p; At/mz. ’Aea 7‘ I“
«new a‘t'vrowov Jone: 6Jews Aroynic oixlatr chair, 6: 50550115)» qi'ua'av i).-
MI‘, 97:6; 3912' «1' J3 76.57, c" scanal «madame»; iii in?!” sor lieu:
-'--“Do you see any absurdjty, Diogener, in living in a house,
“that another person has lived in before? No, says he; or
‘5 in failing in a ship where a great many have failed P No,
‘9 norin that neither, says he. No more is there i ,——-’-‘ Senfe.
less ﬁuﬂ". Nor is that of the adulterous woman in Prom. S. bet-
ter: where 710173)] 1211 '[Th “the way of a man with a
“maid," is placed with the way of an eagle in the air, of a

' . ' ferpent

‘IL



\

Truths reffecting Mankind, Ede. 265

When any one wrongs another of his property, he
wrongs him of what it is to him, the proprietor:
and the value must be set according to what be
eﬂ'eems it to be, not what the injurer, who perhaps
has no taste of:virtuous pleasures, may think it to
be. (See p. 54., 55. obf. 3, 4.) Nor may theie
thefts be excused from their fecrecy. For I. the
injustice of the fact is the same in elf/w, whether
known, 'or net. In either case truth is denied:
and a lie is as much a lie, when it is wbzﬁerd, as
when it is proclaimd at the market-cross. 2. It has
been shown (feet. 11.) that the rectitude of our ac-
tions and way to happiness - are coincident; and
that such acts, as are disagreeable- to truth,
wrong in themselves, tend to make men ultimately
art/mm 1. Things are so ordered and disposed by
the Author of nature, or such a constitution of
things flows from him,,that it must be so. And.
since no retreat can  impervious to his eye, no
earner so much out of the way, as not to be within
his plan, no .doubt there is to every wrong and
vitiou: act a suitable degree of unhappiness and
punishment annext, which the criminal will be sure
to meet with same time or other m. For his own fake '
therefore he ought not to depend upon the dark-_

ferpent upon a rock, and of a ﬂlip in the fea, I'll ﬂKDD‘ N‘NJ
3"!le “MN ‘13” Elli)“: “which leave no track to be feven af-
“ter them 5” and therefore she fit/JD 7RD W9 DHJPD.“wipes
“her mouth," and then thinks that  \‘VJW'? 53111 1'" "lsz
s1N ‘5‘?st “she may say afterwards, What have I done ag
‘.‘ miss 2” [See .295. wenaqi,

p 1 Nema malusﬁlz'x: minim} e‘orruptor, s9’41 “No bad man
“can be happy, to be sure no debauchee can, is’e.” JUVo

m ’Ama-ad‘pas-w ydp; 361(9- 16p©’. “There is no, cfcaping the

f! divine law.” PLOTIN. ' ‘ ' ‘

4 ness



‘266 The RELioION of NATUnE. Seélz. VI.

ness of the deed. But lastly, it can hardly be, but
that it must be dzﬁwerd ". Pe0p1e generally rtﬁ
in vice, grow impudent and vain and careless, and
discover themselves °: the opportunities contrived
for it must be liable to obfervatiou: some conﬁdent:
must be trulied, who may betray the‘secret, and
upon any little diﬂaﬂe probably will do it: and
beside, love is quick of apprehension 1’. . . _ .

It will be easily perceived from. what has been
said, that if to murder, rob, etc. are unjust and
crimes of a heinous nature, all those things which
have any tendency toward them, or ,aﬁnity with
them, -or any way -cauntenance them, must be in
their degree criminal q: because -th ey are of the
same complexion with that which they'tend to,
tho not of the same growth, nor matured into the
gross act, or perhaps do not operate so presently,
apparently, or certainly. Ema, malice, and the
like, are canatw’s toward the defiruétion or ruin
of the'person, who is the object of these unhappy
passions. To tbrow duﬂ ' upon a man’s reputation
by innuendo’s, ironies, Cs’c. may not indeed fully it
all at once, as when dirt is thrown, or graft ca-‘

3! Kati we, air «Mazatlan. agu’slpr, 1751‘" 5931i”. “For, if you are
“hid for the present, you will be found out afterwards.”
Isocn. Mapvau’ascu—ai airy ; Mler; Msyamir-S'xr' “The bed,
“the lamp, will bear teﬂimony,0 Mgapmtbm.” LUCIAN.
0 'Hd‘oﬂi pit yaip «Twain-m dhafnis‘at’ror- “Pleafurc is the apteﬂ:
.“of any thing to boaﬁ.” PLATO.
~ p 25421 nonferm't amar ? “What is it that love can't see i")
Ovrn. -
9 'AyaSo‘r s’ ea [41} dJ‘lui'r, dale? 13 (all) i3iam. “To be good i3‘
“not only not to do an injury, but notifo much as to desire
“to do one.” A gnome “laying ” of Demon-ates. i
- r pun zwh pm. is The duli of an ill tongue."

. lumnies 3



Truth: refpeﬂz'ng Mankind, 84‘. 267
lumnies; yet it infeé‘ts the air, and may dei’troy it
by a lingring poifon. To expoﬂe another by the
strength of a jetting talent, or harder temper of ‘ -
face, is to wound him, though it be in an in'vgﬁolo
place ’. Many freedom: and reputed .civilities of
barbarian extract, and especially gallantries ‘, that
proceed not to confummate wickedness, nor per-
haps are intended to be carried so far, may yet di--'
vert people’s affections from their proper object,
and debauch the mind ". By jiorie: or infatuation:
to fow the ﬂed: of difcord and quarrels between
men is to murder, or hurt them, by another band.
Even for men to intmddlo in other people’s af-
fairs, as buy bodies and oikho'rejomia'novrox do, is to
aﬂ‘ume a province, which is not theirs; to concern

a 3"?!9'7 phn 1‘7 m DIN! wan ~29 s‘JLJDﬂ-“He.
“that puts his companion to fhame in public, than have no
“portion in the next life.” Mam. Uﬁm. pastl For, accord-
ing to the 7miﬁ doﬂors, he who does this breaks the fixedh
commandment. Anne. \

" See how chaft the Roman: were once. 2:30 matronale dew:
‘lelfllﬂdiet munimto twin: c3721“, in jar worantz' matronam corpus
g’ar (stringer: non permiferant, at inmiolata mam}: alime taﬂaﬂola
relinquoretur, “That the decent modeity of a matron might
“the more fecurely be preserved, if any man fued her, he
“was not allowed so much as to touch her, that her garment
“might remain undeﬁled by the hands of any ﬁranger.”
VAL.MAX. And it is told of P. Mmiur, that triﬂz' exemplo
precept"! [flit [ea], at non jolum wirginitatm illibatam, fed
(tiara o/E'ula ad wimmﬂncera perferret. “He, gave it in charge
“to his daughter with a severe threat, that she should carry
“to her hulband, not only her virginity untouchd, but her
“kiﬂ’es chaIt.” Id. . . ' '

“Quanta autem preﬂantior s/1 animus corpora, tanto fie/era-
tz'z‘u commpitur.’ “By how much the mind is more excellent
“than the body, by so much is the corrupting of it a greater
_“wickedness.” St Aus'rm. '

them-j



268 Tire RELIGION ofNA'rURE. Seé'hVLv

themselves with things, in which they are not con-
cernd; to make that public, which in itself is pri-
vate; and perhaps to rob the person, into whose
business they intrude themselves, of his quiet, if of
nothing else. For indeed this intermeddling looks
like fetting up a pretence to something further;
like an unjuit attack begun at a dii’cance. All'
which declares what an enemy, and how irrecon-
cilable to trutli, this pragmatical humor is.. And
ii) on. ' e

If these things are so, how guilty must: they be,
who are designedly the promoter: or instrumentr of
injuftice and wickedness; such as mercenary-swear-
ers, and false witnesses; traders in fcandal; folici—
tors in vice; they who intend by their comer/anon
to relax men’s principles too much, and (as it
seems) prepare them for knavery, lewdnefs, or any
ﬂagitious enterprize '.

There are other crimes, such as inﬁdelity to
friends or them who intruﬁ us with any thing, in-
grotitudo, all kinds of wilful perjury, and the like,
which might have been mentioned in the propoﬁ-
tion, being great instances of injustice: but because
they are «ti/idly such, and their nature cannot be
mistaken, I comprise them in the at Mt. there.
‘Any one may see, that he, who acts unfaithful! ,
acts against his, promises and engagements, and
therefore denies and sins against: truth; does what
it can never be for the good of the world should be-
come an universal practice; does what he would

a W 05¢“u’em chapel of rro‘ i'J’m unit ’37:} minute iym «Rama?!-
7.;, u. “These are the peﬁilent fellows, who labour to per—
“suade every body to be guilty of the same crimes with them.
f‘ felves.” St BASIL.

not

1.





'1" rutb: reﬁieﬂing particular Societies; ' 2 69

not have done to aim/Elf, and wrong: the man, who
depends upon him, of what he justly might ex-
pect. So the ungrateful man treats his benefactor
as not being what be is, etc. And the fal/é- wearer

' respects neither things, nor himself, nor the persons
‘ affected, nor mankind in general, nor God himself
as being what they are. All this is obvious ".

S E c T. VII. Trutbs rcfpeﬁz'ng particular So;
cieties sif Men, or Governments.-

I. A N is a facial creature: that is, a jingle

man, or family, cannot fab/9]}, or not well,
alone out of all society. More things are neceil‘ary to
[cc/lain life, or at leai’c to make it in any degree
pleasant and desirable, than it is possible for any
one man to make and provide for himself merely
by his own labor and ingenuity. Meat, and drink,
and clothing, and house, and that frugal furniture
which is absolutely requisite, with a little need"-
fary physic, suppose many arts and trades, many
heads, and many hands. If he could make a Ihift
in time of bealtb to live ’as a wild man under the
proteé'tion of trees and rocks, feeding upon such
fruits, herbs, roors, and Other things, as the earth
ibould afford, and happen to present to him; yet
what could he do in ﬁckne/i, or old age, when he
would not be able to ﬁir out, or receive her bene-
ﬁcence. ‘

* Crane: enirn I'M”): beneﬁcii oderzcnt. “For every body
“hate a man that forgets the kindnefl'es that have been done
“to him.” CIC. And the same may be said of the unfaith-
.“£311, perjured, €9’c. ,



270 51% RELIGION OfNATURE. seam.

If he thUld take from the otbcrfcx such a help,
as the common appetite might prompt him to
seek, or he . might happen to meet with in his
walks; yet still if the bonds are doubled, the want:
are doubled too: nay more, additional wants, and
great ones, attending the bearirg and education of
children. _ .

' If we could suppose all these difficulties fur-
rnounted, and a family grown up, and doing what
a ﬁnglc family is capable of doing by itself; fup—
porting themselves by gardening, a little agricul—
ture, or a few cattle, which they have some how
got, and tamed (tho even this would be hard for
them to do, having no markets, where they might
exchange the produce of their hulbandry, or of
their little flock, or herd for other things; no shops
to repair to for tools; no fervant, or laborer to af—
ﬁﬁ; nor any public invention, of which they
might serve themselves in the preparation of their
grain, dreﬂing their meat, .manufacturing their
wool, and the like); yet still it is only the cortex
of the man, which is provided for: what must be-'
come of the interior part, the mind: of these people?
How would those be fed, and improved Y ? Art:
and ﬁiences, so much of them as is necessary to
teach men the use of their faculties, and unfold
their reason, are not the growth of single families
so .employd. And yet for men to lay out all their
pains and time in procuring only what is proper
to keep the blood and humors in circulation, with-

? Q1512! ergo, .am'ma mdlane [moot alimenta propria ? an 9'8:
s/24 fcicnﬁo moi: evidctur P “What then is there no proper
“nourishment for the mind, does not knowledge seem‘to be
f‘ the food ofit?” St Ann.

OUt

Truths rejpeﬂing particalar Societies. 27!

out any further views, or any regard to the nobler
part of themselves, is utterly incongruous to the
idea of a being formed for rational exercises.

If all the exception: againstt this separate way of
living could be removed; yet as mankind inCreafes,
the little plats, which the several families poﬂ'efs,
and cultivate, must be enlarged, or multiplied: by
degrees they would find themselves ﬁraitend: and
there would soon be a colliﬂon of interests, from
Whence disputes and quarrels would enfue. Other
things too might miniﬁer matter for these. And
beside all this, some men are naturally troublesome,
vicious, 'thieVish, pugnacious, rabid; and theft:
would always be diﬂzurbing and flying upon the
next to them: as others are-ambitious, or covet-
ous, and, if they happen to have any advantage
or superiority in power, would not fail to make
themselves yet greater or stronger by eating up
their neighbours, till by repeated incroachments
they might grow to be formidable '. .

Under so many wants, and such apprebetg/z'om,”
or preﬁ’nt dangers, necessity would bring l‘ome so-
milies into terms of friend/172p with others for- mu.
tual comfort and defence: and this, as the reason
of it increased, would become stronger, introduce
I’criéter engagements, and at last bring the people
to mix and unite. And then the weak being glad
to lhelter themselves under the protection and con-
due]: of the more able, and so naturally giving way
for these to ascend, the several forts would at

' Alter in alteriu: tritium Ierw' compemlz'o 'dua'tur. “' They
‘.‘ destroy one another in the shorteﬂ: way that they can.’~’
San.

length

1272 T11: R’EL'ici'oiv of NAT'URe. Se&.VII.

length stir]: into their places, according to their
several weights and capacities with respect to the
common concern. And thus some form of a so.
ciety must arise: men cannot fubﬁl’t orherwife.

But if it was possible for a man to preserve life
by him/21f, or with his peril company about him:
yet no body can deny, that it would be infinitely
better for him, and them, to live in a society,
where men are serviceable to themselves and their
neighbours at the same time, by exchanging their
money, or goods, for such other things as they
want more; where they are capable of doing good
(fire: each for other in time of need; where they
have the proteﬂion of laws, and a public security
againit cheats, robbers, alTaIiines, and all enemies
to property; where a common force or army is
ready to interpose between them and foreign inva-
ders; and where they may enjoy those difcowries
which have been made in arts and learning, may
improve their faculties by canvarfation and innocent
conﬂicts of reason, and (to speak out) may be
made men.

If, when we have the privilege of society and
laws, we can scarce preserve our own, or be fafe,
what a woful condition should we be in without
them; exPofed to the infults, rapines, and violence
of unjust and merciless men, not having any fanc-
Iuaiy, any thing to take refuge in ? So again, if
_ notwithstanding the help' offriendr and those about
us, and such conveniencies as may be had in cities
and peopled places, we are forced to bear many
pains and melancholy hours, how irkfome would
life be, if in licknefs or other trouble there was no

body to adminiﬁer either remedy or con/clarion .?
- ' Laﬂzly,

Truth: ref/petting particular Societks. 2 7g

_- Laﬂzly, society is what men generally deﬂre.
And the inueb company may be attended with
much vanity, and occalion many evils ‘, yet it is
certain, that absolute and perpetual solitude has
something in it very irkfome and hideous 5. Thus
the focial life is natural to man; or, what his nag

ture and circumstances require.

II. The end of faei'et} is the common welfare and
good of the people aﬂaciated; This is but the confe-
quence of what has been just said. For because
‘ men cannot fublil’t well, or not so well, .separately,
therefore they unite into greater bodies: that is,
the end of their uniting is their better fubﬁl’tence;
and by how much their manner of living beeomes
better, by so much the more effectually is this end
answered. .

III. A/eciety, into which men enter for this end,
supposes same rule: or laws, according to which tan
agree all to be governed, with a power of altering or
ddding to them as area/ion shall require. A number
of men met together without any rules, by which
they submit to be goverud, can be nothing but
an irregular multitude. Every one being still ﬁti
jurir, and left entirely to his own private choice,

a zlriﬂotle says a good man would be neither 191105 “with-

“but a friend,” nor “Home's “have a great number of

“friends,” This is just. Therefore Seneca seems to go a little

too far, when he writes, 0mm amico: babere afaran eﬂi, jhti:

eﬂ inimica: nan balms, “It' requires great pains to make all
.‘.‘ men our friends, it is sufficient to have no enemies.”

. b 28» aunytms'mo‘v EJVSQQWW. “Manisafociable creature)!

5t BASIL.

T ‘bz



 ‘fI'be’RELIcION of NA'ru'RE. ,Sedt. VII.
by Whatever kind of judgment or pajlion or ea—
price that happens to be determined, they must needs .
interfere .one with another: .‘nor can, such a con-v
cont-se of people be any thing different from an in-
digested 0%w3-0f diffenting parts, - which Ybytheirf
cwgfu/éd motions would damnify, and deﬁmy each '
other. This must be-true, if men dzﬁrin the ﬁze:
of their understandings, in their manner of think-
ing, and the several turns their minds take from
their education, way of living, and other circum-'-
ﬁances; if the greatest part of them are under the -’
direction of bodily afeﬁiom; and if these d‘iﬂ'er as~
much as their shapes, their complex-ions, their con-
ﬂsitutions do ‘. Here then we find nothing but con- 5
ﬁzﬂon and unboppimy}. . l
4 Such a combination of men therefore, as may"
produce their common good and happiness, mqu~ be‘
such a one as, in the first place, may render them
compatible one with another: which cannot be with-
out rules, that may direct and adjust their several .
mations 'and- carriages towards each other, bring‘
them to some degree of ‘ unfoer’ty‘, or at least re-'
ﬁra’in such oxcmjﬁom and enormities, as would ten?
der' their living together inconsistent. "
" 'Then, there must be ‘some express declarations
a‘nd‘ﬁz'to to ofoertoin properties, and titles to things »
by common consent.:. that:so, when any alterca-
tions or dilputes shall happen concerning them (‘38.
be sure many must in a World To unreasonable and,
prone to iniquity), the appeal maybe made to-

q-

. c Man is, in Greg. Naz."s words, «'3 coxuemgﬁwv we" (6’07;
ago-otuww'rov, -“'acreature who loves‘ to tnm‘his t to
“variety of things, “and to employ himself in different ways."

"f 1 their



‘ . was. rg/peaaeg'partimlar Societies. r215
 ownﬁttlmms'; and by the application of a
gangral updajﬁaated rule to the particular Cale before
them it may appear, on whirl: fair the obliquity
lies, the controverfy may-be fairiv decided, and all
mouths eternally ﬂopped. And then again, that
they may be proteé'ted and persevere in this agree-
able. life, and the enjoyment of their respective pro.‘
parties be firmed to them, several things must be
formatted by way of precaution against foreign in-
vvaﬂam; punishments must' be appointed for of-
feace: committed amongtt themselves, which being
known may deter men'from committing them, etc.
These rules, methods, and appointments of punish—
merits, being intelliginy and honel’tly drawn up,
agreed to, and publishd, are the mutual compacts ‘
under which the society is confederated, and the
law: of’it. ' ‘ ‘

If then to have the members of a society capabfe
of subsisting together, if to ‘have their respectiVe
properties acertained, if- to be ﬁfe ‘and quiet 'in the
poffeﬂion of them be for the general good of the so-
,ciety, and these things cannot be had without law:;
then a society, whose foundation and cement is the
' ,public good, must have such laws, or be 1.11990de
at-least to .design such. .

As to the making of any fartber laws, when
the public interei’t and welfare require them, that
is but repeating the famepawer in' other instances,

which they made use of before in making their-

ﬁrit laws: and as to altering or repealing, it is cer-
. tain the power of making and unmaking here are

4 n8: is" rang—661m: 6013i" tutti. “EverylaLw-nis the go.
' f‘ neral compact of the city.” Damos'rn.

T 2 } equal,

1"

.176 The REIAGION of NATURE.

' ‘egual. Beside‘, when "men are incorporated and live

together for their'rnut'ual gOOd, this emf to be
‘considered at ope time as much as at an’otbe'r; not
only-in their ﬁrf’c constitution and settlement'.

IV. The]: law: and determination: mujt' besuch, 4:
are not intonﬁﬁmt with natural 'justice. For I . To
ordain any thing that interferes with truth is the
.same as to ordain, that what is true shall be falf:;
.or v. 0. ° which isabsurd. 2.. To pretend by a law
to make that to be juji, which before and in itself

' ,was my’u/i, is the same as to ordain that which in-

terferes with truth: because justice- is founded in
truth (as before),‘ and every where. the same ‘.
Therefore, 3. by a law to enact any thing which
is naturally unjust is to enact that which is absurd:
that which by feét. I. is morally evil; and that
which is opposite to tbaf: laws, by which it is ma-
nifeﬂly the will of our Creator we should be go-
vernd ‘.‘ And to enact .whatis. thus. evil must be

evil

e Néyé" ’w) a; we dim:- “The law is the finding out and

.“specifying that which really is.” Sron. a? Plat. ' '
‘ 7 Alarm» paint, dune-or, a) «annex? fly aw'dv Ix“It! "(41" ﬁmp
*3 05; 29‘? 5'34“m‘ 5' menu "in. “‘ Juﬂice is founded in na-
g“ture, is unalterable, and is equally in force everywhere; in
“the same manner as the fire burns here and in Pnﬁar” Amer.
3 Even the Heathens believed; that above all human urv’r
ﬂat-d, “ediﬁs,” there were incur-u aging“3:5: ﬂame, “un-
~“written and unalterable laws of the Gods," which mortals
«ought not to tranfgrefs: 8' you} w:57 y: effect81: aikk'ﬁoi at" (:7 «rd.
. mu “because these are in force, not only for a day or two, but
“for ever.” SOPH. Net ﬂ reguam‘e Targuinz'o nulla erat Rom
strippeda 11x (1': Anprz'r, idcz'rca non contra---legem/émpitemam Sex.
Targm'niu: ruin! Lucretia-«attu/it. E rat mint ratio [mg/25¢ 3
rmm nature, s9’ ad’ retiéfariemlum impel/rm, s5 ti deliﬂo‘ am-
‘ m:

L

'1.



3'wa rig/paging particular Societicso . 2 77

mil indeed. Lastly, to el’tablish injultice must: be
,utterly incogﬂﬂent with the general good and hap-
pinefs of any society; unless to be unjustly treated,
pilled, land abused can be happiness ". And if so,
it is utterly inconsistent with the end of society -, or,
it is to deny that to be the end of it, which is the
.end of it.

V. Afoa'ety limited by law; fuppaﬁ: magi/2mm,
and a fuéordination of powers: that is, it fuppo/és a
government of same form or o‘tber. Because, Where
men are to act by rules or laws for the public weal,
some must of n'ecestiry' be appointed to judge,
when _thofe laws, are tranfgrelt, and how far; to
decide doubtful cases, and the like: there must be

can:: qua: mm rum deniq; incz'pit 1:);:ﬁ, rz‘m/Z'rzfta (ﬂ, jid tug:
aim orta  Orta 41mm ﬁnial eﬂ mm matte dimina. “Where.
-“fore if, in the reign of Tarquin, there were no written laws
“at Rome against: whoredom, yet neverthelefs Seam Targui-
“m'u: afted contrary to an eternal law, when he ravishd Lu-
“(retia; for there is such a thing as reason, which proceeds
*‘ from the nature of things, and which urges us to' do that
‘ which is right, and forbids us to commit anyc-rim'es; which
“(reason) does not then begin 'to be a law when it is written
“down, but was from the beginning; that is, it began when
“the divine mind began.” CIC. ' _ , a 1 '

h 81' tmta pate/Ia: gﬂ Anlterrzm fententii: atg; jig/1'5; at comm
frgﬂhtgii: rerun naturawertatur.; cur non/hadron, at, gm: male
femic'iry'aq; fwd, babeantur fire but}, ac [glutariéus 2 'aut airs,
cmjm ex irfjaria [ex fem-e lip/it, 50mm eademfam-e non pqstir
ex 222an P f‘If the opinions or commands of weak and foolish
“men are of so great force, as to overturn the nature of things
“by their majority; why do they not eltablish it by a law,
“that those things, which are evil and pernicious, shall be-
“come good and advantageous? And why cannot the same
“law make the things that are good evil, as well as make an
"f injury a lawful thing P" Crc. -

T; same

I

.r.



578 TIM Rn L 1' o 1 o N ‘of Nmum. Seét. VII.
'some armed with authority to execute those judg-
ments, and to puﬁifb offenders: there must be pet‘-
.fons 'ch‘ofen no't onlyto punish and premix: public
:eVils, but also to do many Other things, which will
the r'e'quired in advancemem of the public gOOd:
and then the poWer Of niakin'grnew laws, and ab-
rogating or mending old ones, as experience may
direct: or the case at any time require, as also of
providing presentl'y. and legally for the faféty of
the public in time ofﬂm‘dzn danger, must be lodged
fomewher'e. ‘ " ' 7
If there are no exézutors of the lawstth'e la‘w’s
cannot Be exeetJted: and if so, they are but a dead
“letter, and' equal to‘ me: and if the society has
‘none‘, itis indeed ﬁo for'z'étjy, or not such a One as is
the subject of this proposition. Guardians and exe-
Eutors of laWs are therefore the vital: of a society,
Without Which there can be no circulation of justice
in it, no care of it taken, nor can it Continue, And
since men can be hm in one place at once, there
must  number: of these proportionable to the big-
.ness and extent of it. ' ‘
And further, since the concerns of a ‘WhOle so-
tiety, and such things as may fall Within the com-
pass of a ﬁatute book, are various, requiring feve-
tral forts and ﬁzes of abilities, and lying one aim
another in nature; linee not only private men
want to be instanced, but even magiﬁrate‘s and of-
ﬁcers theeffectl‘ves, who (tho they oft forget it) are
ltill but men; and since the whole, society is to be
b729, one compact body: I say, since the case is
thus, there m‘uft be men to’act in several el‘e‘vaﬁ-
tions and qualities as well as places, Of "\gvhileh the
inferior sort in their several quarters must act im-
" e ' . mediater

-g'mtﬁy refinemg particular Societies. ' 2 799

mediater under their respective ﬁcperiors; an'd'so
this clafs of 'superiors in their several provinces-um,
der other: aheve them; till at last the afcent is ter-.
minated in scine/seed, where the legiﬂative power.
is depoﬁted, and'from whencespirits-and motion
are communicated though-the, Whole body. An
arm may as well be sUppofed to be well disciplined,
well provided, and well conducted without- either
general or oﬂicere, as a tbciety without governor:
and their ﬁchalterm, or (which is the same) with-
out same form of government, to answer the end of
its being.

> VI. 11 man may part with same of his natural
rights, and put hing/Elf under the government of laws,
and those, who in their severalﬁatiou: are, intru/t‘ed
with the execution of them, in order to gain the pro-
tettiou of them, and the privileges of a regular faciety.
Because bythis he does but exchange one thing
for another, which he reckons equivalent, or indeed
fireﬁrahle by much: and this he may do Without
ﬂing against any truth. For the liberties and nae.
aural rights, which he exchanges, are his am, and
therefore no other man’s property is denied by this:
nor is the nature of happiness deniedto be what'it
is, since it is happiness which he aims ,at in doing
this. On the contrary, he would rather oﬂ'end
against truth, and deny happiness to be what it is,
if he did not do it; -especially seeing, that here his
own happiness coincides with the general happiness
and more convenient being of the kingdom or com-
monwealth, where his lot falls, or his choice deter-
mills  to live. ‘ . '

'280 The RELIGION of'NA'runa. Seét.VII.

If the question ishould be asked, what natural
rights a man may part with, or bowfor he may part
with them; the general anfw‘er, I think, may be
this. Some things are essential to our being, and
some it is not in. our power to part with. As. to the
my}, he may depart from them ('0 far as it is con-
ﬁften‘t with the end, for which he does this 2 not
further, becaufc beyond that lies a contradiction.
A man cannot give away the natural right and pro—
perty he has in any thing, in order to pro/ewe or
retain that property: but he may consent to con—
tribute part of his estate, in order to preserve the
re/i, when Otherwife it might all be loft -, to take
his [bore of danger in defence of his country, rather
than certainty periIh, be inslaved, or mind by the
conquci’t or- oppreﬁion of it; and the like.

VII, Mn may become members of o foeiey (i.e.
. do wire: is mentioned in the foregoing proposition) by
giving their eonfent, either explicitb', or implieitly.
That a man may subject himself to laws, we have
seen. If he does this, he must do it either in his own
per/on; or he must do it by some proxy, whom he
fubstirutes in his room to agree to public laws; or
his consent must be eo/leﬂed only from the confou-
mity of his carriage, his adhering to the society,
accepting the benefits of its constitution, and ac-
quiefcing in the ‘eftablifhd methods and what is
done by virtue of them.’ By the two first ways he
declares himself explicitly, and direﬁb': not can he
after that behave himself as if he was no member
of the society, without acting as if he had not done
what he be: done. And this is the case not only of
them, who. haw: been ancemd in. thc first forms
tim

. Truth: reffecting particular Societies. 28 1'

tion of any government, but also of them, who
have in the said manners i given their consent to:
any subsequent acts, by which they owned, confirm-
ed, and came into what their anceﬁorshad done;
or who have by oz:th put themselves under obli-'
gations‘to the public. By the [a]! of the three-ways
mention’d a man’s consent .is given indeed impli.
citly, and less directly: but yet it is given, and he
becomes a party. For suppose him to be born in
some certain kingdom or commonwealth, but
never to have been party to any law, never to have
taken any aatb to the government, nor ever for-
mally to have engaged himself‘by any other at}.
In this case he cannot methinks- but have some low
and [ympatby for that place, which afforded him
the first air he drew; some gratitude towards that
constitution, which protected his parents, while
they educated and provided for him -, some regard
to Othofe obligations, under which perhaps they
have laid him, and with which limitations as it
were they (or rather the Governor of the world by
them) conveyd to him his very life. ,.

" If he inherit: or takes any thing by the laws of
the place, to which he has no indefeaﬁble right in
nature,.or which, if he had a natural right to it, he
could not tell how to get, or'keep, without the aid
of laws and advantage of society; then, when he
takes this inheritance, or whatever it is, with it he
takes and owns the law: which give it him.

,Indeed since the fecurizfy he has from the laws
of the country in respect of his person, and rights,
whatever they either are, or may happen to be
hereafter, is the general equivalent for his fubmiﬁ

i In person, or by proxy. f
1m

282 The RELIGION of NA'rit us. See}. VII.

[ton .to them, he cannot accept that without being.
obliged in equity to pay the. '

Nay, lastly, his very continuing and ﬁttling in any
place shows, that either he like: the constitution, or
likes it better than any other, or at Ieaﬂt thinks it
better in his circumﬂdnee: to conform to it than to
feel: any other: that is, he confents to be compre-
hended in it *. ' -'

- VIII. Wbena man is become a member of a factory,
if be would behave himself according to truth, be
ought to do the]? thing:: viz. to consider property. a
as founded not only in nature, but also in law;
and men’s title: to what they have, as ﬂrengthend
by that, and even by his own toneqﬂm and cone--
mats; and therefore 'by so mueb the more invio;
lable and sacred: instead of taking such measures'
to do himself right, when he is moleﬁed, or ,in-
jured, as his own prudence might fuggdt in a ftate
of nature, to confine himself .nosuch way: as are '
With his own consent markt out for him: and, in
a word, to behave himself according to his [abor-
Hinotion or place in the’ community, and to observe
the laws of it. For it is contained in the idea of a
law, that it is intended to be ooferoed: and there-6 ’
fore he, who is a party to any laws, or ptofeifes
himself member of a society formed upon laws,
cannot willingly tranfgrefs those laws without de-
nying laws to be what they are, or himself to be
what he is supposed or profeiiés himself to be: and

(‘ ‘1‘ Plato says, when any tnan has seen our form of govern-3
mam, (9’6. and remains under it, 51‘» ngit'ﬁm dpoxoyuiva
'25? 5M": “that then we say, so’ch' an one does indeed agree

“with US.” .' I 1
‘ indeed

frilth r‘qﬁtﬁing pasticﬁlar' Societies L:2'8‘3
indeed without contradictin‘g' all or more ofthofc
Itrntbs contained in the foregoing PfOPOﬁtiOﬂSr ‘ ' ' J

IX. In ro/jnc'z'of Ibo/ovtbz'ngs, whicb though law: of
” Ibo place take no cognizance of, or wbcn  they do
Jake cognizance of them, the benefit of tho/2'1an can-
not be bad (for so it may sometimes happen. I say‘,
in respect of such things), be wbo is a memocr of ‘a
focicty in other reﬂeﬁs retain: his natural noon,
still as it were in a state of nature, and inn/i endea-
‘oour to act according to truth and his 5c]! prudencé.
' For in the former case there is ‘nothing to limit him“,
a by the sUppoﬁtiom but truth and nature. And in
the otbcr it is the same as if there was nothing;
lime in cfﬂﬁ there is no law, where no cfc‘ﬁ or be;-
neﬁt from it is to be had. As, for example, if a
_man mould” be attacked by thieves or murderers,
- and has no opportunity or power to call the proper
magii’crate or officer to his afﬁi’tance. ’
There is a tbird case, which perhaps may def
'mand admiﬂion here: and that is, when laws are
plainly contrary to truth and naturaljn/fz’ce. F of
tho they may 'pacts‘ the hfual forms, and be styled
laws; yet, ﬁnCe no such law can abrogate that law
of nature and reason, to .which the Author of our
being has fubjea-ed us, or make falfhood to be
truth; and two inconsistent laws cannot both oblige,
or subsistt together; one of them must: give way;
and it is easy todiscern, which ought to do it ‘.
‘ There

' 1 IllndAnltg'ﬂz'nmnz, exg'ﬂz'ncarc omnia jnﬂa oﬂé, gaze/circa sin;
in papa/0mm itg/Iz'tzctz's, an: jogibun—Si populoramjzg/z}, ﬁ prin-
cipum decrctic, ﬂ fcntcntii: judicum, jarc‘z constirnerentur, jic: cﬁt

latrocimri: jus, adultcraro: jux, tq/ianzonta falfa ﬁcpponcrel,’ ﬂ
’ ' ‘ car

 7%.: R E L I c I ON of Never: 11' E-. Seét. VII.

There remains. one truth more to be annexed
here, which may be contradicted by 'the practices
and pretences of Enthuﬁacts m.

X. The foeietie: intended in this feﬂion, fuel? a:
kingdom: and commonwealth, may defend theeffectlne:
again/t other nations: or, war may lawfully be waged
in defenee and for the jeenrity of 'a foeiety, it: mem-
bers and territories, or for reparation of injuries. For
if one man may in a state of nature have a right to"
defend himself, (see feft. VI. prop. VII.) two may,
or tbree, and so on. Nay, perhaps two may have
a double right, three a threefold right, fife. At
least, if ‘ the right I be not greater, the concern is
greater: and there will be more reason, that two,
or three, or more should be saved, than one only;
and therefore that two, or three, or more should
defend themselves, than that one should. And if '
this may be done by men in a [late of nature, it
may be done by them when confederath among
themselves: because with respect to other nations
they are still in that state. I mean, I so far as they
have not limited .themselves by league: and allig-
anew.

't’mte ﬁtﬁagz’i: ant ﬁiti: multituo’ini: probarentur. “That's very
“fooliih indeed, to imagine that all those things are just,
“which are et’tablishd by the decrees and laws of the people.
I‘ --If right were made by the ordinances of the people, by
‘ the decrees of princes, or by the fentenees of judges, it
9‘ would be right to rob on the highway; it would be right to
“commit adultery; it would be right to forge wills; fuppo-
ling all these were allowed by the majority, and by the de-
grees of the populacy.” th. ‘ .
In Manic/Jean: of old, and same modems.

a

I
I

9

.‘

Beside,‘



- Truths reypeﬂing particular Societies: ‘2'8

Beside, if a man may defend hirnl'elf,r hermay

defend himself by what method: he thinks most
proper, provided he strefpastES again'ﬂ“. no tmth;
and therefore, by getting the aid and aﬂiﬂtance of
others. Now when war is levied in defence of the
public, and; the people in general, the thing may
:be considered as if every particular man was defend;
ing himself with the aﬁiftance of all the rest, and
so be turned into the same case with that of a ﬁngh

In truth the condition of a_ nation seems to be

much the same with that of a single per/an when
there is no law, or no benefit of law, to be had:
and what one man may do to another in'that po-
ﬁtz'on, may be done by one nation or politic body
~with respect to another: and perhaps by thisrule,
regard being had to what' has been delivered in feet.
4V1. the justice of foreign wars may be net untruly
ei’timated. ,

Mutual deﬁance is one of the great ends of focie-
:ty, if not the greatest, and in a particular and emi—
. nent manner involves in its defence against foreign
enemies. And whoever signalizes himself, when

there is occasion for his service, merits the grateful
acknowledgements and celebrations of his coun—
try-men: so far at least as he acts generoufly and

with a public fpirz't, and not in purfuance only of ~

' private view.

As to those'wars, which are undertaken by men
out of ambition ", merely to enlarge empire, or to
thew

~ ‘ Like those particularly of:7. Cedar: of whom it is re.
v rted, that, auimaa‘verﬁ apud Herculz': templum magm' Alexa
dri ~imagine, ingemuit; qua/i perm/u: iguarvz'am fuam, gage;

“3 l

286 Tk‘R’eroio'N 2f Nn'rvrtg. SeﬁVIIL

'lhcw the world, how terrible they are; how many
men they are ableto ﬂay. how many slavestp make “5
\ .‘hOW.m3ﬂ€y fanﬁlies to drive from their peaceful haw
'bitations, and, in Anort‘, how much min and mi.
fiery they are able to bring upon mankind; thcfc
are founded 'upon false nations of glory: imbellzjbﬂ
indeed by fervile wits and mifplaocd eloquence, but
underlined by all true philosophy and religion. ‘

  VIII: Trntb: concerning Families and
i a ' ' Relations.

‘ H I S feﬁion I shall: begin, as relation itself
does, with marriage. ' .

(7 I I. We and 6f marriage is the propagatian of man;
kind, ‘ Md joint, bappimﬂ',‘ of the coupk interwar);—
(wg. Mien togethr; or we latterb' iii/elf 9, The dif-

2
3211621 dam a ﬁ manager]: 449m sﬁt in estate  Alexander
erbem' ferrarum ﬁéegg'ﬂ'et,‘ “.upon viewing the ﬁatne of Alexa?-
““der the Great in the temple of Hercules, he gave a ﬁgh, as
‘3‘" it were, to reproach his own Anggifhncfs, that he had done
“‘ no memorable thing", at an age when, xﬂmmder had con-
“querd the whole world.” SUET.
‘ 0 Some‘go to war 5:71:99 Bari Sign a) uurnywt’ar new“... “in
“order to hunt down and worry men.” PLUT. Not out of
'necessity, and in order to peace; which is the true end of war,
;,lio(up£mb in: airing imam». “We go'to wanthat we may pno-
“cure peace.” Anrs'r. [ta bellum ﬁr/Eipz'arur, at uibil algal
flair): fax gawﬁta ‘védeatur. “War .should be undertaken in
“such a manner, that nothing else but peace may be seen to be
‘ “aimed at by it.” CIC. ' ~ - ‘ ‘
\' ,p .03 £73027” 3’ p67” '73: “armada: xa'eu vantage-u, ulna? a" '1'"
a}; we: ﬂier, M, “Men do not marry for the fake of having chil-
“dre'n only, but for all the other purposes oflife.” Anu'r.

feregfe



Truth: concerning Families, Us,  _ £7:

forence of the ﬁnes, with the Krong inclination M.
have each to the enjoyment of the other ‘1, is plainly
ordaind by the Anchor of nature for die continuance
of the finder, which without that must be sannex-t
tinguifhd. And- tho people, when they marry, may.
have many times not so mud) the increase of‘thein
famiiy in their design or wishes, as the gratification .
of an importunate appetite -,.yet .since nature ex-;
cites the appetioe, and that tends to this end, nature
(or rather its  Author) may be fair! to
this an end of the marriage, tho the bridegmmand.
bride themselvesdo not.: ._ ' \ . t
And then as to that Other thing, which either
accompanies the aforesaid end of marriage, or is
(as in many cases it can only be) the end itﬂeg’f ', ,thé
. gaunt

' i q ’hnl‘el aiming} pmlufoxe'i'u'rd ne'er! Jaime". 113'an
org? pu’m eurd‘unsmér minor; oomeua’r, “It is natural fora man
“toloveawoman; for man is as much made for the society
¢‘ a woman, as for the society of each other.” Anrs'r. ‘ﬂc win
5 payriﬂc “SQ—we}: inuva way owing: bum' sI'm “79‘ «3 SuiMQ' ‘65-)
pa—‘to‘ «5 iii»@‘ «Spa twgo‘c trip (nifty bum. “For as the loadinne
“draws iron, so the woman attraﬂs the man to unite with
“her.” St BASIL. ‘ i ,

r That fare is a hard law in Plato, which enjoins Jaime“,
dP‘U“and“"1'": 5'  [Mi ﬂou'hom-o of! co: mica-3‘4: «'3 camp“, “men

“to have no familiarity with a woman, without withing for the
“success of it.” That mentioned in S. Hlmrcd. says otherwise;
1:1 mmyn mummy qm army cm: D‘TJ'? 3m
“It is an affirmative precept, that a man should act the part of a
“husband, tho his wife is incapable of having any children.“
Many opinions are taken up upon ﬂight reasons. When Oce'lg
1w Lucanu: fayvsf, Au'wait oral: Judge“,:9 wt Spams,:9 mi: 5p$£m rate
«‘6: mi! piElv 670‘ 31:? Isle/aim: drS‘ejn'olc, ix “07;: 3mm 12423734;
eupCiCuu, dud fit 61': rro‘v da‘ xpo'vor J‘mpovﬁc rts ﬁrst: “that the
“powers, the organs, and the desire of procreation, were
3‘ given men by'God, not for the fake of pleasure, but for the

,“perpetual

(ii



Aﬁf—MFMAA "r j;

288 Tb: Riudion' of NATURE. Se&.VfII,

joint ha'p‘pinefs of the canjuger, no body can be‘
supposed to marry in order and on set purpose to
make him or herfelf unbapjzy: no nor without. a
presumption of being more 1mm. For without an
apprehension of, same degree of happiness to ac-
crue, or what presents itself to the imagination as
such, and is taken for such, what can induce peo-
ple to alter their condition? Something there must
be, by which. (however things prove upon trial)
they tbiukto better it. And indeed if their circum-
ﬁanm are such, as may inable them to maintain a
family, and provide for children, without difﬁcul-

‘f perpetual continuationof mankind," how does he know that
they were not given for both these ends, in a regular way i '
And so when Clem: ﬂex. shows his zeal against: wit ain't?"
"cat‘s. 1'31 09‘: we}: hauls: imam, “Inch familiarities as produce
“no effect, meddling with pregnant women,” sin adding,
4m} 748p Mm}, an}: it .7139 "91:93:15, oeahopéc it'd, Mo “that
“such mean pleasure is unlawful, even in married persons,”
he does this because; Mao-5r dimly“1'5! but,» rrx‘t 1.35:9, “Myé;
“forbids a man coming near a pregnant woman ," and then
cites a text to prove this, which is nothing to the purpose, nor
I believe any where to be found: 00’» “am so" 1478', 8'“mi!
34"”- (Qrmn iatnfretem/écutwﬂt Clemens udb'o. “Thou shalt
“not eat a hare or a hyaena. (What commentator Clem: fol-
“lowed, 'I know not.” Gent. Hem.) Certainly the Jews un-

, derl’tand their lawgiver otherwise. See how that E1319. “con-
“jugal due,” mentioned in the law is explained by Mail». in
5:71.175. Nor are the fuﬁ'rages of Chriliians wanting, Data,
can caterer animanta, ﬁtfceptofa’m, mariﬁu: repugnare Cvaluiﬂét‘,
[51am amm'um mlz'erem patientem «viri ﬁcit tum: fem'm': repug-
nantibur, libido cogent wire: aliud appetere, etc. “When God
“made all other female animals, so as to refufc the males“
“when they are pregnant, he made women only capable of
“men;---lelt, upon their refusal, men‘s violent paiﬁons should
“. force them to go after others, Es’c." that is, that the man
and wife might be kept infeparably together. Lacr.

"- ties



 .~ . Trytlarrngenging Families,  ~ m 289
Lties and an over-burden of _ cares, and if they in
good came/i- resolve to behave themselves as they
ought, and reciprocally to  helpful and loving
each to other, muchcomfort and happiness ‘ may-
justly be expected from this intimate union. ‘, the
interchange of affections, and a confpiration of all
their counfels and meafnres “, the qualities and abi-
lities of the one fex being fitted *andjas it were
. tallying to the wants of the other. For to pass over

in silence those joys,,which are trueﬂ: vyhen moll:
concealed “’Lmany things. there are, which may be
useful, perhaps neceﬂary to the man, and yet re-
quire the delicater hand or nicer management and
genius of the woman. ":_ and so, viciﬂtm, the woman

8 Km‘ «'5 kph-moi Jun J‘on'i', a.) v3 “9 37 Julia-av tn? wit/gt.
“There seems to be both profit and pleasure in this sort of
“fr‘iendfhlp."ARrsr. ﬁJ‘DtU WNW] D‘JF‘IU ﬁtUNl W‘NIDJ
DH‘J‘J. “When the man and the wife behave themselves to.
“wards each other as they Ought, they are then most inti-
“mately united.” Re/b. bbokm. .

t 'Eepc—uaa'émp 370‘; («is J‘n'lat‘ eyn’ywrd—a'; munch afgyuo’ﬂm-au. '
4“Love—Lis like two partsof the same living creature—united
“into one.” PH. JUD. ‘ '

“True love is to be found in marriage, or no where. ' mm
yelp one?! a’x. hired-at, in! imCaMu’u ,uéror; 4“For there is no real
“. love in whoring; nothing but enfnaring one anothcr.” St

Chen. 3101ij 3'7?““BUD HFHD- “They difcbver their
“nakednefs, but hide their real sentiments;” a homely, but
true laying of a jmi/b commentator. A L

V’ andfacere turpe no» sﬂ 7:10:15 occult); id dice” abﬂc‘mum qﬂ.
“That which has no evil in it, when it is done in private, may
“- be obfcene, when spoke publickly.” C to. r d

x ’13:!) 7:11p  nod-plate} imwulc, 8' ,uo’vav only aim? trig removing-ode;-
303'!” aquifer eq‘iaird‘a‘. 6M6 m} iv «7: in": eta-ac: can?" dishw-
m‘h x9016! ixt’el'fﬂmma- “For, if she be neat andgood-natured,
1* she will not only in general be a comfort to her husband,
!s but will be very usefulto himin every particular.“StCHst.

‘ '  U‘ ' cannot

‘2



ago The Rents-rot: of NA‘I'U’R-‘E.  VIII.

cannot but want many things, which require thé
more-robust and active powers or greater capacity
of the man 7. Thus, in lower life, while the wheel;
the needle, 3e. employ her, the plough or some
trade perhaps demands the muscles and hardiness
of bin:: and, more generally, if [he infpeé‘ts do-
mei’tic affairs, and takes care, that every thing be
provided regularly, spent frugally, and enjoyed with
neatness and advantage, be is busied in that
profession, or the oversight and improvement of
that estate, which must sustain the charge of all
this -, he presides, and directs in matters of greater
moment; preserves order in the family by a gentle
and prudent govemment, €9’e. ‘

As then I founded the greater facieties of men
upon the mutual convenience, which attends their
living regularly together; so may I found this le/i,
but ﬂriﬂer alliance between the man and the wo-
man in their jointehappiness '. Nature has a further
aim, the preservation of the kind.

11. 7'64:

3 Aryan: eat Inn, 9‘ 39'» Inga M‘g‘r, 19 'ymmdr. inputs“: It «37"-
:uihue dc eizmo‘v “same vm‘ Nut. “Their business is‘ different.
“‘ there is one sort of employment for the man, and: another
“for thewoman; so that they are assistant to each other,- by
“joining their forces together." Anxs'r. ‘ '

2 See the conversation between I/ebomacba: and his wife in
W503. ‘

‘ Tho Plato (like my} of the old Creel: and Romans) among
many «my line things has now and then fomethat ateweale;
and eyed absurd‘; yet I cannot think, that by his continuity of
women he meant any thing like that, which is said, up. Abba.
to havebeen praEtifed outed Tuﬁﬁmlc ass-(m emimm“among
gf‘ “the ‘Iynbeuiam, who were exceedingly debauched;" or that
his thought could be so gross, as Wu: represents its: Sci-.-
(ice: at ad tandem till/W tau/ti Wifi, Magma can“, reﬁne.

arm,



frail»: renaming Families, C‘z’e‘. ‘ '291“

, 11; TM marriage: are made b'some/olemn oontrqﬁ, _
‘vow, or oath (and tbq/‘o per/nap: attended with form.
pledge, or mgpﬁol rites) b, by svbicb the parties mu-

. Mall}

mt, “namely, that several men, like so many dogs, should
“run aﬂer one woman.” For thus, property being taken out
of the world, a great part of virtue is extinguishd, and all in-
dulh'y and improvements are at an end. And beside that, many?
of the most fubltantial comfort: and innocent delights of this
life are del’troyd at once. 82' 0mm miuufuerx’nt s9’ miti, if
pan-er, s9’ wearer, s5’ liberi, gm s#4 confqﬁo generic bumam' eﬂ ?
-.Qgéi: an: wir mulierem, ant mulier ‘vz'rhm diligz‘t, avg/1‘ [monta-
maria! somepa- um} P m]? doruota near, s5’  iwicm
individmr ﬁcerit taritalem, etc.5 -f‘ If all were the hnlhands:
“and fathers, and wives and children of all, what a confu-
“ﬁon would there be among& mankind ?-—-for how can the
“man love the woman, and the woman the man, unless they
“live always together? unless their minds be devoted to each,
“and tﬁir ﬁdelity mutual, which will make" their ail'eﬁions
“inseparable, 59%.“Id. However it must be confeﬁ, that Pla-
to has advanced more than was conﬁl’tent with his own gra-
vity, or with nature. The belt excuse to be made for him,
that I know of, is that in 'Athemtur, "Bolt"; 117d“! ml wait son
dos-giant: yeﬂslu 11?: “page, «Inn? 707: 0'3" ain’t hum-Mbﬂopirm,
“That Plato seems to have made his laws net for such as men
“5 now are, but for men of his own imagination:” or perhaps
to say, that he was so intent upon ﬂrengthening and defending
his common—wealth, that he forgot, if men must live after his
manner, there would be little in it wortb defending. After all,
his meaning to me is not perfectly clear. ‘ ‘
h Every one knows how marriages were made among the
Romans, tonﬁrrreatione, “by oﬂ’e‘ring up of burnt cakes,” col-
mprione, “by the man and his wife, as it were, buying one'
“another, by giving and taking a piece of money,” ujir,
“or by use, when the woman had livbd with the man a whole '
“years” of which ways the two former were attended witlt
many ceremonies: and the Iegitim toddler, “writings apa
3‘. pointed by law," or at least ccaafent of friends (which could
2 110‘

1



Q

292 The Reunion of NATURE. Se&.~VIII.
wally ingage to live together in love, and to be fajzbv
fu‘l, aﬁﬂing, and the like, each to other; ﬁl‘dﬂ cirruW-‘a
ﬂames of health am? fortune, till deatb purify 'them ‘,
I take for granted. For all nations have fomeform
Or other upon these occasions:' and even private
contracts cannot be made without lfome word: in‘
which they are contained, nor perhaps without some
kind of ﬁgniﬁcant, tho private, ceremony between,
the lovers; which lose nothing of force with re-
fpeé‘t to them by their being both paftz'e: and wit-
mjﬂE’: themselves. Somethino' must pass between

0
them, that is declarative of their intentions,expreﬂ25

their vows, and binds them each to the Other. There
is no coming together after the manner of man
and wzfe upon any other foot. ‘

not be given. without some solemnity) preceded all, gawk-11¢

“omens” were usually taken, public notaries anda 'tneﬂes

aﬂiﬂed, €9’e. Among the Greek: inen and women wer espoused

by mutual promises'of ﬁdelity: beside which there were wit-

n.eli'es,' and dotal writings (090‘354); at the wedding, sacriﬁccs-
to Diana and other deities, and the awn/duct w'xai, “nuptial ‘
‘f ,‘prayerslg” and after that, perhaps the being shut up toge-

.ther, eating the avdéveu, “quince, together,” a-forzpal Aa’a‘ec‘
(am, 5‘ untying of the bride’s girdle," 53’“. The [‘KDWF!’

“nuptials,” of the yew have been performed ﬁDDJ: “by

‘f money,”.or 1E s03, "‘ by writings of contraﬁ,” or 3ND].
“by going into the! house:” the ceremonies accompanying

Which may be seen particularly in She/bib, ar.‘ with the addi-

tions ’of 1?. M0. Iﬁrle: (Eben e2. And (to pass by other nations)

the form of solemnization of matrimony, and the manner, in

which ‘perfolns. married give their trot/J eaqh to other among 115,.
are extant in our public oﬂices: where .theyrmay below by

such, as seem to have forgot what they are; 7

' i ‘ Cozqzuéioﬂaéj/i. “I By a lailing marriage," Vim. ’

*' — "111.47%:



. .1, Trail): concerning Families, etc. ‘ . 29 3

III. Tbat intimate union,’ by which the"conjuges
ﬁécom'e each of the 7other’: person ‘, the mixture
"of their‘foﬂtunes °, and the join} relation they ba've ta
their children ‘, all ﬂrengthen the hands and obligation;
“of matrimony. ‘By- every 4152 done in purfuance of a
covenant, such as .the matrimonial is, that cove-
nant is owned, ratiﬁed, and as it were made de inte:
gro, and repeated. ,

Peﬂéﬁon is certainly more than nothing. When
this therefore” is added to a former title, the title
must: needs ‘be corroborated. ' ' ‘ '

' When two persons'throw their all into one f’cock
as joint-trader: for lzfe, neither of them can cone
ﬁﬂently with truth and honeﬂty take his share out
and be gone— (i.e. diﬂ'olve thepartnerfhip) without
the concurrence of the Other; and sometimes it may
not be easy, perhaps pofﬁble‘, to do it at 311. Each
therefore is even by this bound“, and becomes ob—
noxious to the other. ,

And as to the present case, if the marriage be
not aléogether unfruitful, since both the parents

I
d m, m w: mm rm'v rem 131 ms: 1:11:97 mm
'm tsm tn mm N'Tr—wwn 2mm. “And they be-

“came one ﬂelh, for itis the cuﬂom for men women to
1 0 \

_“come together,-—and that they be no more vided. ’ In

Re/b. bbobn. ‘

6 A17?» xpnpaf'rm annular apes-zine: palms-z 1-07: wafﬂe", 1i: pin;
1?ka «ulnar xac'raxmphou 1g) a'm‘uGag-I, (a? '1'3 pip@‘ i’J‘m, a) «'6‘ 54?.
¢@’ JAAO’TQMI, dxka‘. an?! IJ‘iov iysTaS'ac, 04‘ swe}?! dhkéreuy- “It be-
“Ian; chiefly to married persons to mix their fortunes to-
“gether, so as to have but one common flock; and not for
“them to think that part of it belongs particularly to one and
‘5‘ part to the other, bat the whole is their own jointly.’-‘ PLUT.

f 261:?pr fra‘. reign: Judging. “Children fecm to be the bond
"‘ (of’matrimony.”) Aars’r.

.. U3; ' ' are



294 The REL IG ION Qf‘NATUli.E.'S€&.VIu.

are immediately related to théfame child, that child
is the medium of a fixed, unalterable relation between
them. For, ,being both of the same blood with the
child 9, they theeffectlve's come to be of the same
hlood: and so that relation which at first was only
moral and legal, becomes natural; a relation in
nature, which can never cease, or bedifannulled.
It follows now that, '

1V. Marrying, when there- is little or no pro/poi!
of true happiness from the match ", (and q/pecz'alb if
there are‘ plain pro/age: of whopping/i; after war-
riage adultery; all kind: of inﬁdelity; transferring
that aﬂﬂion, which even louder, the dooay:._ofnature
ought to prqﬁrve it: vigor, and never to ' dqenerate
(at war/l) hut into a friend/h? of a fztporior' kind;2

A a

s In respect of , which that in Plntarch particularly is true,
‘H pu’a-u Myron J‘m‘. vro'n'r captain-01535:, if if inertia" pigO‘ Maw»
:39!) trufxiaoa, unit a'ppo'ripolr circle? 16 yuipnor, “Nature, by
“means of our bodies, so intermiites us,that what is produced
“becomes common to both, beinga part of each, when united
“together.”

1‘ Socrate: ah adolo/Z'entulo quodam, ron/ioltas, nxorél‘hz duceret,
an ﬂ omm' matrimonio ah/Iineret, re/jbondz't, Utrm eormnﬁoi at,
451mm: panitentiam. Hi: to, inguit, folitudo, hit orhitar, hit
generz': interitm, hie hetero: alienu: excipiet: illic perpetua/blt‘d—
r tudo, contexta: guere/arum,—incertw liherorunz emeritus. “\Socra-
“to: being consulted by a young man, whether he’should take
a wife or abstain wholly from matrimony, answered, that,
which of them so ever he did, he would repent of it. On
the one hand, says he, solitariness, want of children, the
death of relations, want of an heir, will attend you; on the
other hand (you will find) perpetual anxiety, uninterrupted
complaints,—and the uncertain event of children.” VAL,
MAX.

1 X5679 C‘UVMS'H'd; irrrma’o'u: @é3©' 4‘79;th 'rgi' Mylo/4o? vrq‘ one;
:9 1-3 a‘; mi, imrayéyuov. “When by living a long time together
. ,:6

'u
u
6‘

(C

q .

3

“



‘I’rtttbs concerning Families, 69%. 295

and the like, are all wrong 'F. Because the" first of
these is belying one’s own sense of things, and has
an air of di/tmttion; or however ‘ it ‘isto act as if
that was the least and most trifling of all tranfac-
tions‘ in life, which is certainly one of the greatest
and most delicate. And to offend in any of the other
.waysis to behave, as if the end of marriage was not
what it is; as if no such league had been made be-
tween the persons married, as has been made, attu-
uﬂ],  solemnly, and is still subsisting between
them; as if they were not poﬂéjt each of the other;
their fortunes not interwoven —, nor their children
so equally. related to them, as they are; and there-
ﬁore the mllbehavior, being repugnant to truth, is
a sin against it, and the mighty Patron of it.

If the most We}? and falemn contracts, upon
‘whichrperlbns, when they marry, do so far depend,
as in confidence of their being reh'gz’ozglly .observed
to alter quite their condition, begin a new tbred of
life, and rt'fqtte all their fortune and happiness: I
say, if .such sacred compacts as tbtﬁ: are allowed to

“their mutual affection is eflablishd, we find that, which was
“at first paction, is by reason become true friendship and love.”
fun.

1‘ It is vilible that polygamy, pelliratt, etc. must' be included
here. They are not only inconsistent with our forms and the
very letter of the marriage. contract, but with the eﬂént: of mar-
riage, which lies in such a union and love as can 0125' be be-
tween two. Jrg'ﬂotle dath not allow there can be even perfect

ﬁiend/ln’p between more than two: much less therefore, per.-

feé‘t loam: Hanoi: si'uu plmr, nae-u? tn}! cruel” and”, «he irJlxsrnu.
clam; x‘J" ipéiv «rt-Meir 15m- “It is impossible to be a friend to a
“great many, I mean, to be in perfect friendship with them,
“as it is impossible to have a love for a great many at the
f‘ same time.” Etb. flirt wig me- 1M©' who'r- “For a friend
f‘ is a second self." 16:21.

U4 " be



296 The'RrLroron of NATURE. Se&.VIIL'

be broken, there is. an end of all faiib; the obligao
tion of oath: not more binding'than marriagems)
ceases; no justz’ce can be adminiﬁerd; and then
what a direful inﬂaence must this have Upon the af-
fairs of mankind upon that,- and other accounts ’5‘.

Allowance, by feet. IVsought to be made for in-
‘abilities, and involuntary Failings. Aperson’s‘ age,
health, eftate, orother circumstances may be such,
'and without any fault,:thatrhe or she cannot do
what they Would; Or pe‘rh'aps instead of'that one
of them may come to Want the pity and aﬂzﬂanra’
of the'oth'er. In this cafefwlﬁch requires thenphiy
.lofoph'y’and submission’ proper in aﬂiiftions) it is the
:duty...of the one not only' to bear'with, but also to
comfort, and do what may be done for} the other.
.T his is- 'part of the happiness prap'ofed, which con-
ﬁfts not only in pasttive plea'fures, but also inrlqﬂm
ing pains and Wants; 'whill’t the- pair have each in
the otherra refuge at hand. ' i U: .‘f,

:N. I have defrgnedly forborn to mention that
aut/aoritybﬁa husband overrhis Wife, whichiis ufu’
ally given to him, nor only by private writers,
but even bylaws  became I think it has been car-
ried much too lug/a. I would have them live so far
'upon t’he'léfvel, as (according to my conﬂant lelTon)
:to be governed ball? by reason m. If the man’s rea-

" i ' son

1 F avczmzla culpmfzerula mgptz'a: Primz‘m inquimmeré, ES’gemu,
 Jamar. 'Ho‘cﬁnte dark/ale cinder In patrz'am, pophlamqaeAnxit.’
“The ages, that were Fruitful in vice,, first deﬁled marriages.
“corrupted relations and families.- From this fountain ﬂowed
“that deftrué‘tion, which overwhelmed the country and its
.“inhabitants}: HOR. I i

m K$Tlst J‘s? 'rc‘v ai'rd‘ea e3; Mums; s'x an'c «Pu-mi?” n'ripatrrg', JAR“
53': «Luxsir q'dpa‘rw, “turret-3h".:9 cvywipuuo’ea 5:? w'rot'gt. “The h‘uf.

“band



‘-

..4.“

Truth: conrérning Families, 59"- 29.7

son she ﬁrpnger, or_his knowledge and experience
greater (as. it is» commonly supposed toxbe), the
womaawill beobliged upon that scoreto pay '8.ka
former, and submitto shim ". . .
:. Having now. considered theorem and woman be-
tween themselves, I proceed in the order of nature
to consider. them’ as parents; and to see (in a few
pnopoﬁtions following) how things will be carried
between tbm . and their children, as also between
other relationacomingat first: from the same bed,
if truth and matter: offaﬂ (,to be named, where the
' argument shall ‘call for them) are nor denied.
1 4 V. Patent: ought to educate their children, take
113:. liq/f care .of- [loom tiny can, endeavor to provide
for Mom, and basalng ready touraﬂﬁ tbam. Becaufé
Otherwife they:do ‘not- carry ,themselves towards
their children vasbeing. what they are, obildren and
their:: they do not do what ,they would desire to
‘ have- done' to (bang/“elves, were they again to pass
through that feeble and tender state; or perhaps
what has been done toothem‘?: and beside, they
. .: tranfgrefs
“band ought to have a power over the wife, not such as aI
“man has over his goods, but such as the soul hasi‘over’the
‘ “body, fympathizing and becoming one in benevolence}:
PLUT. (A sentence, which defer‘ves to be written in letters of
gOld.) ‘07:: on) 11595376 fair—313's a!) xdgocxgioiuod‘tooréng, up)
3703 Wet'dztsq‘oinolimowo “Where you are the_man Gajas, I am
“the woman Gaja; whe’re you'are matter and governor, I
“am miﬂrefs and governefs.” Ap. rand. f
n Kan-a2 pu’o-n oi £55m: s‘pérov iv vroi'c a’vSego'orotc: duat‘im‘ iv aroi'c 57h.
N“s05°10 irxwt- “Nature has appointed the males to govern,

<‘ not only among& mankind, but amongst: all other living
“creatures.” PLATO in Diog. L. - . "

0 Halon-A5338; a" cot yw’ac Ankh. lﬂ'd'rej‘: ya‘g 1411?, Magi/.4“«vigor:

“ thall leave you a very‘good eitate. For I had l‘uch an one
a ' “

Ir

Bi



298 The R12 L I (HON of NA '1' can. Se&.VIIL
tranl'grefs the law eftablifhd'by nature for the pee-
fervation of the race, which, as things are, could
not:without a parental rare and affectionrbe con-
tinued; a law, which is in force among all the
“other tribes ofwlmab, fofarasthereisoccasion
for it. .

Not to do what is here required, is not [any
to act againl‘t truth and nature, not only fuchsan
omission as:is mentionedin left. I..pr. 'V. but a hei-
nous instance of cruelty. 'If any one .can denythis;
let him better eonﬁder the case of aninfant, ne-
glected, helpleis, and having trashing" so much as
to folicite for him, but his tries and (that which
will ddbutllittle in this world) his innocence: let
himthink what it would be to turn a tbild, the a
little grown up,:out of doors, destitute of every.
thiuggnotknowing‘whither to: fly. P, or what to- do:
and whether it is not the same thing, if 3he be left
to be turned~out ‘by'any body else hereafteryor (in
general) to conﬂiaz with want and inf/my: let-him
reflect a while upon the circumﬂrances of poor or-
phan: ‘1 left unpmvided fbr, to. be abused 43y every
body ', (it. and then let him say, whether it is puf-

“from my father.” EUR. Parenta- tvo: alendo inform nutrien-
Joi'zm' Zebito (/5 gui: sﬂ pudar) alligacvemnt. “Your parents, in
f‘ maintaining you, made it a debt upon you (if youhave any '
“sense of ihame) to maintain your children.” VAL. Max.

P Inca-ta: gm) fataﬁ’rarzt, 1151' ﬁﬂere detur, “it is uncertain
t" Which way fate will carry me, or where I shall settle," in
~ the poet's language.
‘ Q‘See “that moving description of the 'HMP iron-m3» “an
“orphan ” in Homer.
_' ' I could never think of that Arabic saying Without pity,
The baréer [DNJHLIN] learn: to f/Jarvc up” the bead g“a»
9W1“!!-

ﬁat:



Truth: concerning Families, (it. 299
jiole for a parent to  so void of bowels, as not to
be moved with there considerations; or what epi-
zloet he deserves, if he is not. If any of them who
have 'been thus abandond, and turned adrift, have
done 'well, those instances ought to be placed among
partieularpro'videnee:: as when. a veITel at fea, with-
outpilot or failor“, happens to be blown into the
port. ' .- ' . r ‘
Not only the'care, butcthe early care of parents
is required, left death sliquid-prevent them; death,
which ﬂdps none, 'and-surprifes many. Not to re.
member > this, and act accordingly, is in practice
to contradict one of the molboertain andooviom of
_ all truths. . ' r , ~. .

VI. In order to the good of children, their educa-
tion, 81c. there inn]! be some antbon'ty over then:
lodged by nature in tbeparenr:: I mean, .the nature of
the case is such, 4: neeqﬂ’arily require: there jbonld be
in the parent: an antbm'q over their children in order
to tbez'r good. At find if some body did not nurfe,
feed, clothe, and take care-of children, the interval
between their first and last breath would be very
ﬂzort. They, on whom‘it is incumbent to do this,
are undoubtedly their parent:: .to do this is their
duty by the foregoing proposition. But then they
must do it as they can, and according to their judge
ment: and this is plainly an act of nutbority, to or»
der and difpofe of another according to.onc’sjudg-
ment, tho it be done according to the oeﬂ of one’s
judgment. .

As the child grow: up, the case is (fill the same
in some degree or Other, till he arrives .at the age
reckonedm'ature; and very often longer. He is be-

. come

goo TIM R'ntrotozv of NATURE: S'ec't. VIII.

tome able perhaps to walk by hinffelf, 'but what
pafb to choose he knows not; cannot diﬂingbifh his
fafet‘y’ and his danger, his advantages and difadVan-
tages; nor, in general, good’and evil: he must be
iwarned, and directed, and watchedﬂ‘lll‘by his pa—
rents,“or some body intrul’ted ‘by‘ them; or else it
might have been possibly mut‘h better for him- to
have expired under the midwife’s hands, and Pitt
%’nted, the em of his own ignorance] . ..
. When he am: only runs about, but beginsto
fancy‘ himself capable of governing [aim/elf, by how
much the moralie‘thinks himself ‘ capable, by so
much'the-hfs capable may he be,2 and the more may
he want to be governed. The avenues of .feryE‘are
opened: but the judgment and intelleAnal faculties
are hot ripend -"-but3 with time‘and much practice.
‘The work! is not easily known by persons of adult
’abilit‘ies; and,» when lthey become tolerably ac?-
'q'uaint.ed with it, yet they find things in it so in-
tricate, dubious, difficult, that ‘it is many times
hard '-sor them to. arefol-ve, what “measures. are ﬁttest
to be taken: but they, who are not, or but lately,
'pal’t their mm, carmOt be supposed to have any ex;
tent of knowledge, or to .be,‘ if they are left to
themselves’, any thing else but a prey to the villain
.‘who first feizes-upon them. Inﬁeadof judgment _
and experience wexfind commonly in' youth such
things as are remotest from them, ‘childish appea-
tites, irregular past'ions, peovish and oblﬁnate hu-
mors, which require to be fubdued, and taught to
give way to wholfom counfels. Young people 'are
not only obnoxious to their'o‘wn homers and fol;
iies,Zbut also to those of their companions. They. are
apt J0 hearken to them, and to imitate one and,
a, - ' thers

' the 'concMing‘Families, 8:96; ' " got
“#115 rhiﬁonduéf: and thus folly. mingles With!
filly, tidaincreases prodigioufly, The judgmcna
therefore of the ‘ parent: must' .ﬂzill interp0fe,,ahc1
preﬁ‘dm'and giddéthrough all thefestager of infancy;
childhood, ’and youth; according to their power,
improving the "minds of their children, breaking
‘the' strength of their inordinatejpactions, cultiVara ’
7mg rude nature, forming:their mmném,‘ and“
showing theh1_the way which they augbt to be
foundim. ,‘J .- ‘ ..;. ,”....i ii; .a.
.These things are so in fat}, and a parent canhot
acquit himself Of the duty impoiiad'upon him .in‘the
preceding prepoﬁtion, if he acts R) as to deny them 9
but then he cannot act so as not ta day them (that?
is, so as to fubdue‘ the passions-uof the child, break
his'ﬁomach, and cause him to mind his ini’truétiOns)
without some sort of dgla'pline, and a proper feve-
rity; at least: very rarely ’. -. V ' ~-
‘ To all this, and much more that might be urged;
must: be fuperadded, that the fortune: of children,
and their manner of fetting, out in the world deo
pending (commonly) Upon their parents, their par,
rents must upon this account betheir direﬂors, arid“'
govern their'aﬁairs. " _  A ' .
N. I. It appears now'from‘ the premiﬂ'ks,‘ thﬂa‘l.’ '
even parents have not prpperly. a dariz'nian over;
their childrm, such as is intended-s66%. VJ. prop. ’V';
from which this parental autbarify‘is a very GEE;
rent thing. This only respects thegood of  Chilﬂ

. . ' . . " r. .r .. J.

‘ ‘ _For1certainlrx, when it can be, Hocpatrimfg/I, port)“tona-
ﬁufacrre ﬁlium [ua ﬂout: rtﬂefacere, 1min aﬁ‘cxo m, “J t 15
~« the dirt): orarather w accustom his son to do ‘right ham
‘6 his'own gonad-twill, rather than from the  cults."
TER.‘ ' ‘ ‘ . . -1 g ,, ' ‘ “ﬁrst” ,2 .Llrﬂﬁ

. dren,

igg—‘Vﬂ— —.-..

‘11"!

302 The R tumor: of NAT-U Kn..Se&.VlII.

dren, and reaches not beyond the  whiqgﬂ
the parents, acting according -to the bell; i then" '
ﬂtill, abilities, and Opportunities, find melt con-
ducive to that and: but dominion. onlyrespects
the will of the 1ord,, and is of the same extent with
his pleafum Parents may not, by virtue of this‘
authority, command their children to do. any
which is. in itself evil: and if they do, the children.
ought not to obey '. Nor may they do any tbz'ug,
what they please, to them. They may not .kill, or-
mairn,.or expoﬁ‘them “'z and when they come to
beam or wmn,and are pofi'eft ofeftates, which.
either their parents (or any body else) have given
them, or they have acquired by their own labor,
management, or frugality, they have the same pra-
parties in these with respect to tbez'r parents, which
they have with  to other people .- the parents
have no more right to take them by force from
them, than the relt of the world have ". So that

what

t' n ‘: «En 5m a‘terSi’rm attachaey‘ré ‘rw'troi'rOTr 311m
89 P 7 U!

‘ rﬁmr implant”. “We lh‘oul‘d reful'e obedience to parents, only

_“in rm things as are contrary to the laws of God.” Hum.
" The barbarity Of the thing at length put aﬁopxo the cnﬂom
Of cxpoﬁng' children: but it‘had been practifed by the Per-

. fear, Greeks, etc. Roma/15’s law only reﬂraind‘ it, but did not

lbolish it. For itinjoind his citizens only,‘ inc-av afﬁne 10m?!
519$!“I." Sharrin wit oyroyhar' dwommdnu «'3 [4mm c5: yo-
!“F‘in n‘ﬁpor «ran-ﬁg, an}::1 (or: 7min dam" inimpugut. “to
“bring up all the males, and the lira-born of the daughters;
“and net to’deltroy any of them, after they were three years'
“old, nnlefs they were maimed.” DION. HALrCARN. And be-
side, learn» 3: 03min Mun 'sfzm’aty mnec‘ “9‘ 6:3. 134‘ only? tin-a
d9 «1'31: xgo’mnh. “thefather had abfdute “power over the

9 Ton given him, and that during his whole life.” 11.
- r ‘Popaﬁu’tla'b Mair imam-3m saltru- meipwldfuﬁdhxd I} on"
"yum: d ﬂvdpara'ré'maid‘m 3, rrﬁdmrm Irmrﬁhar #073:-
' '2' U»

S







Truth: concerning Families, etc.‘ 303‘

what occurs in the place abovementioned remains
firm, notwithﬁzanding any thing that may be ob«
jeéted from the case of parents and children. And
moreover, .

N. 2. They, who found monarchy in paternal ‘au-L
thority, gain little advantage with refpect to liq/petit-
or absolute power. A power to .be exercised for the
good of subjects (like that of parents for the good
of their children), and that principally, where -
they are incapable of helping themselves, can only
be derived from hence. The fatbcr of his country
cannot by this way of reasoning be demonﬁzrated
to be the absolute lord “of the lives, and limbs,
and fortunes of the people, to difpofe of them as’
he pleast: ’. The authority of parentsgoes not tbir
length Beside, if a parent has an authority over
his children, it does not. follow, that thecldg/lﬁcc
- should have the same authority, be it what it will,
over his brotbm and ﬁlter:: and much leﬁs, that
the heir of the ﬁr/t parent should in succeeding ge-
nerations have it over all the collatcrabs The very
relation between them soon vanishes, and comes at-
last in eﬁ‘eé‘t to nothing, and this notice with it.

Vdm 6mm “A mongﬁ theRmamchildren had nothing of
“their own whilli their fathers were alive; but the goods and
" the bodies of the children were entirely at the disposal of
f‘ the fathers, to do what they would with them.” 1:]. Thefc
are inﬂanccs of such laws, as should not be, by prop. IV. feet.
VII. “'

1‘ Rm parrot,» pom}: Cicerone»: libera «gait. “When Rm
“had liberty to speak, she called Cicmthe father of his couno.
“‘ my." Juv. .

I 'nc aqui- cps. may; “That ihonld govern us as anion!
’1' creatures.” Au. . . . -

yum



  REL] QION, of.NATUR-E. Seét.

VII.~ A: parents are oblzged to educate their cbif.
dren, etc. so ebildren ought to corgﬁder parents as the
immediate autbors (autborJ-under the‘ ﬁr/t and great
Cate/e 2) .of their being; or to ﬂied/e moreproperly, of
tbez'r being born. I_know children are ,apt (not very
respectfully, or prudently) to say; that their pa:
rents did not beget them for tbez'r fakenwhom they
could not know before they were born, but for their,
deem pleastere. But they, who make this a pretext
for their difobedience, or disregard, have not fuf-
Heiently thought, what pain, what trouble, how
many fright: and care: a,~ what ebarges, and what
jelf-a'enial: parentsiundergo upon the score of their
' thildren: and that ’all these, if parents only rufhd
into pleasure, and ' consulted hothing 'eZ/e, might
easily ,be avoided, by neglebting them and their
Welfare ". For as to those parents, who do this,
let, them speak for themselves is I shall not be tbez'r
advocate. ‘- ' ' ‘ '

' ' VHI. A great fubmz'ﬂion and ‘ many grateful at;
knowledgements, mud: refpeb? and piEty are duefrem
tbz'ldren to tbez'r perms. For if there is an autho-

' 2 can-hm whiny-who, "All-the three' hada ﬂiare
“in the formation of them." S. HHARED. '

a; Utinam oculo: in peélam pqﬂrzt light”, s9’ putrid: inter: de-
\ przndere. rurm. “I with they could look into their bregﬁs, and
.‘i‘ see what the inward cares of parents are.” '

b I confess in Seneea’s words, minimum 42% benefit-item Pam's
matnjque' cozzcubitim, niﬁ accgﬂ'erz'nt alia, qua: prafefueﬂntur be:
initiate: when}, s‘5' alii: (ﬂak) be: rutzmzﬁcermt, “that parean
“merely begetting of their children is the fmalleﬂ kindnefst
".1than wen: 'nothing' else- Whichfollomd this ﬁrth Qﬁice,

‘. “.and confirmed it byrother duties."_ .r. * --.

v. .. . i '- ‘



Truth: eonoernz'ng F amilies, €9’o. 305
rity in parents (as before) this must be answered by
a proportionable fubmiﬂ’ion on the Other side:
since an authority, to which no ooea’z'eoioe is due, isf
equal to no authority. -

If the thought of annihilation be generally dill"
agreeable, as it seems to be, then merely to be con-
fcious of existenoe must have in it something de-I'
'fireable °. And if so, our parents must be con-
ﬁderd as the authors, or at halt the instruments of e
, that good to us, whatever it is: which cannot _be
done, unless they are treated with di/iz'nﬁion and;
great regard, being to us what no other is, or ever.
an or. ' ' .

God, as the ﬁrlt cause of all beings, is often l’tyled'
metaphorically, or in a large sense of the word, the‘.
Fatber of the world, or of us all: and, if we .be-
have ourselves towards Him as being fuel), we can~
not (according to feét. V. pr. XIX. n. 3.) but
adore Him. Something analogous, tho ina low de-
gree, to the case between God and his offspring
there seems to be in the case between parents and
their obildren. If that requires divine woof/kip, this-
Will demand a great refpeﬂ, and reverence “. Nor
can I believe, that a child, who does not honor his
farent, can have any disposition to worship his-

c To devalue-3m 31': (if «'5' 1mm “Veda-6° when yelp damsel! i
3.1.. “To feel that we are alive is a real pleafnre of itself; for
“lifeisnatumlly agood thing.” ARIST. The (case of life (of
i being alive) learns to be something more than what Seneca calls
mam as wen/dam 502mm, “the good of ﬂies and worms.”

. - d 03 «0de 4-5" ‘P-palm than, nae—ole!) It" cnaéc-Iioteoaia-g.
ou‘g york; 30393301.), 0': a) 313‘: ow’ﬂ‘c inﬂow “MTV. “The antient
“laws of the Rohamr-and they that are older yet, paid so
“much reverence to parents, as to oblige us to call them
3‘ Gods.” Smn. . .
e X Crealor.



308 The RELIGXON of NA't-une'. Se&.VIII.

Nor (which is more s’cill) can they do this without
denying what they may in their" tear}; require of
their children ’. In eli'eé‘t they do thus by their ac—
tions deny that to have 'been, which has be'en -, and
those things to be possible, which may  hereafter.

Not only hodib'lnfirmities of parents,'but such
decays of their mind: as may happen, ought to be
pitied, their little haﬁineﬂ'es and mistakes diﬂém-
bled, and their defects supplied, decently “.

IX. That copy/11’ or aﬁﬂian on has ﬁdes, which
' natumlb 'and regalerb is in parents toward: their
children, and viciliim “, ought to he ohfmed and
. followed, when there is nb reason to the contrary. -
We have seen before, and it is evident from the.
terms,‘ that fen/2 ought to govern, when reason
does not interpose; i.e.’ when there is no red/bu
why it. should not. If then this gopyn' or mutual
aﬂ’eétion be an inward sin]? of the case'betwee‘n
parents and children, which, without much think-

“due to them, who are the authors of our being,-—and to reve-
“rence them asGods.” Anrsw. Amonglt the ancients 3W?“-
94. “the rewards of education,” and rennin: “maintenanc:
f‘ of parents,” were reckoned due. And he, who does not require
to his parents imLJEJUJ HIDE”. “the good which they have
“bestowed on him," is called ue‘igoxn 33m, “in an emi-
“neut sense wicked." S. HEAR.
‘ 1 To:s¢@’ yin are) 'rdr'ysnfe, a?“air 9:75:10 0:32 newt}! )4ka
In}: than? 0371‘“. “Do you behave yOurfelf to your parents, as
I “you would will: your children to behave themselves towards
“you.” Isocn. "

In That epithet piu: (pine firmer) (hines in Virgil.‘

1‘ Poﬁta s/1 inter parente: ac Iihera: hone/Ya contentz'a, dalerinl
majara. an receperiu. “There is a very laudable conteil: be—
twixt parents and children; ‘viz. whether they have given or
“received moihf’SeN. ' .  ‘ “. -

r
‘1' .- .~

1
.0

.mg



. Truth: concerningFamilies, Es’c. 309.

ing upon it, is felt by them, and ﬁts upon their
natures °, .it may be comprised in prop. XIV, and
XV. of feet. III, But whether it is or not, the same
may be. said. (which must: be repeated in another
place) of every oﬁeﬁion, paiﬁon, inclination in ges-
neral. For when there is no‘reason, why we should
not comply with them, their own very follicita»
tion, and the agreeableness we apprehend to be in
complying, are pﬂpondoroting arguments. This .
must be true, ifsomething  more than nothing 5
I or that ought to." be granted, which there is no rea—
so'n 'to'dEny. So that if this gopny be only taken as
a kind of ottmftz‘on, ortendenre, in the mere mat-
ter of parents and "children; yet still this physical
rnotion or [ympothy ought not to be overgruled,
if there be not agood reason‘ for it. On the contrary,
it ought to be taken as a ﬁtggq/lion of nature, which
thuld always be regarded, when it is her fuper-
feded, by something fuperz'or; that. is, by reason.
But further, here reason does not only not gainfay,
by its silence and consent, and so barely leave its
right of commanding to this bodily inclination;
but it comes in strongly to ohet and inform it, as
ﬂesigned for a reasonable end: and therefore not to
.5161 according to it is none act according to reason,
‘and to deny that to be which is,

X. The same is true of that aﬁﬂion, which other
relations noturoléy how, in some proportion or other,
each for other. To this they ought to,accommoe-

0 That is, methinks, amoving description in StBa/z'l (1163:“
ennui) of aconﬂiét which a poor man had within himself,

when he had no other way left to preserve life but by felling
one of his children. ' f

‘X3 dale







3.1.0 TbeR'Echro‘ir bf NATURE. Se&.'VIlI.

date theeffectl'ves where reason does not prohibit;
The proof of thid assertion is much the same with
that of the foregoing mut. 'mutand.

 ’The foundation of all natural relation is laid in
marriage P. ’For'the‘ bulimia! and wife having so-
kmnly attachd themselves each to other, having
the same children, interests, (9’6. become so inti-
mately related as to be reckoned united; one ﬂq/b,
and in the laws of nations many times one person ‘1.
Certainly they are such With respect‘to the poﬁe-
rity, who proceed from them jointly '. The chili
dfen'of thié couple are related between themselves‘
by the'mediati‘on of the parents. For every one of
them being of the same blood with their common
parents, thby are all of the same blood (truly con-e
fanguirzez’), the relations, which they respectivel'y

P Prima ﬁcieta: in iii/o conjugio gﬂ: proxima in Iiberir, 83’“
“The strongeft alliance is in rparriage itself, the next in chil.
“dren, we." Crc. .

‘1 Malia)“coiy'unﬂa wire concgﬁt in ununi. “After the man
“and woman are joined tagether, they become one.” Luca-
‘J‘UJT‘I NQU'WHD. “They are. looked upon as one body.”
Ap. R. Elaz. 129. s9’ Mi:

r 'H euyfnmi [Wkla] eau'nnu cows-1N: Jun, albeit-8w win
a“, «7'5; aawyxiir 03 7019?: [xiv yat‘p:39er 'mi vines, a': iaw-ra'i'v w Ena'
cw? J“. orient vra‘c 70197:, a“; dar'ixeivm'n Erma—'AJ‘IAOOi (H mm; [9:-
Kaim] w; an #5! aw'rrﬂv owuiut.—’An’+urﬁ a) oi homo} cuyﬁn'ie,
.45 do?» (r57 may Jnu' 71?"er J" oi piv‘ oixaéﬂgor, oi rdalo'reufo
'npsi, am. “There are a great many forts of friendship amongst:
-“relations, all of them depending upon theparents. For pa-
‘ rents have a .tender affection for their children, becauserthey
“are part of themselves; and so have the children fonthe pa.
rents, bedause they are derived from them.--—Brothers also
‘ (love) one another, because they are born of the same pa-
rents.---cousins also and other relations,---because they
"‘ proceed fromthe same parents also.---And there are same
“nearer related, and same further 0E.” Anus'r.

n

Q‘
a

O
h

bear



frozbe eorieemz'ng' F a’milieS, s5%. .; 11'
bear to their parents, meeting more as in their
center. This is the neareﬂ relation that can! be ’,‘
next to more of man and wife, parents and their
children, who are immediately related by contact or"
rather continuity of blood, if one may speak so‘.‘
The relation. between the4child‘ren'of théfe chil-
dren grows more remote and dilate, and in time
wears out. For at every remove the natural tinc-
rare or fympathyimay be. supposed to be Weakend ';
if for no other reason, yet for this. Every removei
takes oﬁ‘ bob” the chOn blood derived from
the grandparents. For let C be the son of Aand B,-
 the fon'of C, E of D, F of E: and let the rela-
tion of Cto‘A and B be as r: then the relation of
D to A and B will be but;; because C‘isbut one
of the parents of D, and’ so the’ relation of D to
. A and B is but the half of that, which C bears to'
them.‘ By proceeding after“the same manner it will;
be found, that the relation of E to ‘A" and B is 1?:
(or half of th‘e'h’alf), of ‘F -3-:' and so On. 80 that‘
the relation, which de/i'endeats in a direct line have
by blood' to their grand parents, decreaﬂq thus in‘
geometrical proportion ‘, the relation between them’
of collateral lines, which paﬁés ahd is made out’

,;  copio/eeﬁeawitati: illa recordatz'o  P In eodém dorm?
cilia, antequam nafcerer, loaoitarvi: in ii/llem incunaoulis'z'rfantie;
A tempo”: peregi: eofdtm appelIa-vi parent“, 53"“. “HOW very?
“pleasant is the,remembranceof these things? I dwelt in
“the same’dwelling (with such an one) before I was born 3
‘f I passed my‘ infancy in the same cradle; I called the same
“persons my parents, €9’c.” VAL. MAX. I . '

t There is no name for any descendent, who is more than’
Maegan. “three degrees removed from us.”, '

X 4 i ' through



312 The RELIGION of NATURE. Se&.VIII.

through the grand parents, must soon be reduced
.to an inconsiderable matter “.

If then we suppose this aﬁettion or fympathy,
when it is permitted to ad: regularly and according
to nature, no reason intervening to exalt or abate
it, to Operate with a strength nearly proportionaole
to the quantity or degree of relation, computed as
above, we may perhaps nearly discern the degree:
of that obligation, which persons related ’lie under,
to aﬁiﬂ: each other, from this motive.

But there are many circumf’tances and incidents
inlife capable of affecting this obligation, and al-
tering the degrees of it. A man must weigh the
wants of biog/elf ‘ and his own family against'those of .
his relations: he must; consider their fix, their age,
their aoilities and opportunities, how capaole they are,
of good offices, how they will take them, what use
they will make of them, and the like. He, who
designs to act agreeably to tratb, may find many
such things demanding his regard; some justly
moving him to compaction, Others holding back
his hand. But however this may in general be
taken as evident, that next. after our parents and
own offspring W nature directs us to be helpful, in
the ﬁij/t place to brothers and ﬁlters, and then to
other relations according to their respective dif-
tances in the genealogy of the family, preferaon
to allforeigners ". And tho our power, or oppor-

“It becomes #03531: “very obscure." Anon. Rnoo. I
- W Mar: and Wiﬁ' are supposed to be one, and therefore have.
no place here; any more than a man and his self. Otherwife
considered diﬁinﬁly, the one of them ought always to be the

ﬁg? care of the other. ‘

1‘ Mani) uaoiyni'rqi To” ombS-mieuigor. “We must not treat 3

_~“friendequally with a relation." Has. , . _
7 “I tunities

"—-

uh



- Truth: belonging to a Private Man, 53:.; r 3

tunities of helping them in their wants should be
but little -, yet we ought to 'preserve our alfeé‘tion
towards them, and a disposition to serve them, as
far as Welione/lly‘and prudently can, and Whenever

the proper opportunity shall present itself. This
snature and tratb‘ require,

SE t: T. IX. Trut/ei eelengz'ng to a Private Man,"
' V and fcﬂeﬂing (dz'reflbv) only bz'effectf

I. V E 172471 zknows sqrmpy 7 know) le/l,
‘ ' wlaat his own faculties; and Z pee/anal circum-
ﬂance: are, and . consequently what . power: he bar of
filling, and governing himself. Because he only of
all mankind has the internal knowledge of himself,
and what he is; and has .the only opportunity by
reflection and experiment: of himfdf to find, what
his own abilities, ,passions, Es’e. truly are 2.

II. He, that well examine: lien/elf, I fume/2’, "will
find Ike/e thing: to be (rue ‘. ”

7 F or many I acknowledge there are, who seem to be with-
out reflection, andgalmost thought. Tl: aiwoci mi! oil-old}! mime
womér walker. 4‘) min-9c Muir hiya». “Who is there that does not
“understand what he himself is i A great many truly; nay,
“all but a very few.” St CHRYS. ~ -

'.; Ne: fe gmﬁwm‘t extra. “Let him not seek for himself
“out of himself.”

a Iliad 1153141544178! nalz' putare ad anagantim,migu¢Mﬁ-
It)»: riﬂe diam», mm)»: etiam at banana/Ira nagimur. “Do not
3‘ imagine that that (precept) understand yourself thoroughly,
é‘ was’ said only to leﬂ'en men's pride, ‘but further that they.
“might know all. the good thingswhich belong to them."

Cic. ad  fr. ‘
“- ' ' I. That

is»



314 The Reunion of NATUPLE. Sch-LIX.

I. That there are [me things comma; to him
not only with feaﬂtz've animal: and vegetables, but
also with inanimate matter: as,‘ that his body is
subject to the general law of gravitation; that its
parts are capable of being separated; o‘r dill'oca'ted;
and that therefore he is in danger Trom‘falls,‘ and all
impressions of violence. '

t 2. T hat there are other things common. to him
vilith wgetahle: and. fea/itive animal::. as, that he
comes'from a feed (such the original animalculum
may be taken to be); grows, and. is Preserved by
proper matter,‘ taken in and diﬁribtited through‘dgh a
set‘Of Veﬁ‘els'; ripens‘, ﬂOurifhes, withers, decays,
dies, is fubjea: m diseases, may be hurt,for killed;'
and therefore wants, as they do, nourishment, a
proper habitation, prOteétion from injuries, and
the like. ' I . g y ' .

' 3. That he has other propertiesftammon only to.
him and' the ﬁa/z‘tz'ne trihe: as, that he receives by
his sensesmhe notice of many external obje‘é’ts, and
things; perteives 'many_aﬁ“eétions~_ of his body;
finds .pleasure from some, and pain from others;
andwhas certain powers of moving himself, and
aéﬁn‘g: that is, he is'not only obnoxiqustb hurts,
diseases, and the causes of death, but also feel:
them"; is not only capable of nourishment, and

I ' ‘ . many

.1 P Nan .jéntz're male ﬁza not: s/1 hamim':: s5’ for: ﬁrre mm s/3

unit. “Not to be sensible of the evils we lie under is not to.
“'be‘ a man, and not to be able to bear them is to want the
‘.‘ s:ﬁurage bf a man." SEN. who condescends here to be‘some-
th'ing'"'like other men. As 'also when hefays, Alba/ant, qua:
fapz’erztemﬁrz’ant, etiamfi not: pwertunt; ut dolor capitis, ‘fﬂ’r.
Heat (toagzega [entire japieatem, etc. ‘f There are some things
‘ .“which



Trail]; Eeléngihg 10 a PrivatezMan, 59’}. 3':
many 'other ﬁroviﬁonsi made for him, but also in-
joy:, them; and, beside,. may cantrz'bute much‘him-é
Elf to either his enjoyments, or his‘sufferings.‘

'4. That beﬁdé-tbrﬁ he haS‘ot/éer'famltz'ei', whiéh
he does not apprehend to be either in the‘inei‘t
maismf matter, or in vegetables, or even in the
sentitive kind, at least‘ .i'n anyeo‘nﬁderable “degree;
By the help of Which“he inveﬁ'igates truth, or pro:
bability, and judges, whether. things are agreeable
to them, or 'not, after the manner set down. in
feét. III. or, in a word, that he is 47257124! rationale f.‘
i 5. That he  conscious of a liberbiih himself to
act or not" to‘ get, and that therefore heis ﬁlth a
being as is described‘feé‘t. I. prop. I‘. a being, whore
rifts may be morally good qr will Further, ' -

6. That there are in him many inclinatiam. and
amt/ions; from whence ﬂow ruth'affections', as de-
fire, hope, joy,.hatred, fear, ‘ sorrow, pity, anger,
.ch'. .all which prompt him to act this or that way, '

7. That he is sensible of great dqﬂﬁ: and liim}
rations in, the ufo of his rational faculties, and pow.
.ersiof action, .upon many occafions: as also, that
his paction‘s are many times apt to take wrong
turns, to grow warm, irregular, excessive d.‘ In

"‘ which firmeg affe&~ a wife man, though they don’t quite
.“overpower 'him, astbe bead-ach,etc.‘ I- do-nor deny but that
“a wife man" feels such things," (ft.

c  f: if/é mn't, aliguid fentiet ﬁ ‘ Mere divinity, &'c.
“He that understands-what'sort of’a being he himself is, will
“perceive that he has something that is divine in him‘i”
Crc. ‘ . "

‘1 9‘61 ‘13“1017131 9315. “nature Which'is backWard,
.“and a will corrupted,” are (in 7ewg76 language) WING)
“DWI: “the leaven in the lump." ' - ' -

I

other



316 sbe Reunion aleATURIE. SeEtJX.

other words, that he is in many respects fallible,

and infirm ‘2' ‘ ' '  '
Laf’dy, that he desires to lo happy  as every thing

must, which understands what is meant by that

word.  g g _

III. If he dotb find those tbz'n'gs to o; n p; then
be will act as be ought to do (that I}, agreeably to
truth and faft) be  do [21:17 thingr'a: too/2'.

I .' Ho must ﬁtb'el? I his ﬁnfuol inclinaliom,‘ [air 50-
 pojz'om, and the motion: of all 171:: 52mm ‘ to
rod/oh, ' and try my thing by it. F or in the climax
:set down he cannot butobserve, that'as the prin-
‘Ciple of vegetation is something above the inertia
of mere matter, and sense something’ above that
again; so roafoofmuit.  something above all
‘théfe g: or, that".hi_s uppermost faculty is roof

' . e 'Awixaior Jim 1:3,m5rartvaé’wdpmob. “It is next to im.
“pomble'for a man to be free from all ﬂan?" Cnavs. . n
. r The author of ,S. Homo. reckons “352, .the right use of
'which corhprehends all praé‘tical religioni the heart," the eye,
the mouth, nofe, ear, hand, foot, and‘i‘l‘un WNW: “the prin-
“cipal member.’.’ The duties respecting these are the sabject
-of that‘(not bad) book. ‘ A; , a; .
8 C1)»: triaﬂnt luv, eﬂé, rw'rvq'e, intollz'gm: s5" lapir 9/}. (3"
- feta: ride/it, not tamen lastdﬁn para where, an! pom: intelligere:
gm' autem intelligit, cum s9’ eﬂé s9’ witvere tertgﬁmum  ngre
non duoito id exallmtiu: jﬂdicart,s cuizom'z'a'tnh iqﬁint,  ill
-cm' duo ruel 1mm deﬁt., “Since there are these three things, to
“exil’c, to live, and to have underttanding; and a (tone exists,
f‘ beacts live,»foe I cannot think that a [tone lives, or a beat!
-“has understanding; it is' most certain, that the being, which
“has nnderﬂanding, has exists and lives. Wherefore I don’t
“at all fcruple to declare him that has in him all these three,
f‘ to be a fu‘perior being to *him who wants one or two of
5‘ them." .St Avs'r. Thus reafpn fets man above the other vi-
ﬁ'ble order; of beings, etc. .
on.



Truths h‘élongz‘hg to e‘Private Man,  ' 317'
. [En “.2, ‘fr’om hence it folloWs, that he is one of
“'those ings'mentioned feet. III. prop. XI. and that
f the great law impode upon him is to be gowth
bmfmn , .
1 ' Any man may prove this to himself by‘exPeri-
Iment, if he pleafes. Because he ,Cannot‘(at least
jwithom great violence to his nature) do anything,
j if he has a greater reason against the, doing of
than for it. When men do err against: reason, it is
- either because they do not (perhaps will not) ad-
'vert, and’use their reason, or not enough; 6: be-
causep their faculties are defe8cive'. .

And further, by feét. III. prop. X. to endeavor
to act according to right reason, and to endeavor
to act according to truth are in effectthe same
thing. We cannot do the one, but we must do the
other. We cannot act according to truth, or, so as
not ‘to deny any truth, and that is we cannot act
right, unless we endeavor to act according‘to’ right
red/2m, and are led by it.

Therefore not to fu‘bjeét one’s fenﬁtiw incline;
tionsand passions to reason is to deter either that he
is rational, or that reason is the supreme and rul-
ing faculty in his nature': and that is to defert
mankind}, and to deny himself to be what‘he

knows

I ’1 Put/la sﬂ (lamina omimés’ regina ratio—.Heec at impart:
illz' parti Mimi, qua: ohedire dehet, idwideadum s/1 rain. “Rea-
“fon, the gavernor. and ruler of all things, is ready—; every
“‘ man therefore  to see that she governs that part of the soul,
“which ought to be obedient to her." th.  x .
' i Ahjeﬂa honipesin ﬁl-vgﬂr; gimme/(ire. “.Toeaﬂ of the
“than, and become a uhldpreature." Sen .. ’5! ti Wm; who!
xaymIS‘a; rrai'r Saginaw—"05: 3'! (d w 05; 0': 3834’" cosine.
,3: Whom are we distinguishd from by our reason ?-—_-from the
' “beacts;





.320 72, RgLroroN ofNaruns.Se&.IX.

going proposition, is to examine every thing care-
fully, and to see that he complies with no corporeal
inclination at the expenfe of his red/2:71; but that
all his aﬁeﬁions, concupifcible and. irafcible, be di—
reéted towards such abjeﬂs, and in such mafure,
time, and place, as that allows. Every word ° and
action, every motiOn and Itep in life should be con-
ducted by reason P. This is the foundation and in-
deed the sum of all virtue. ~

2. He m'uﬂ take care not to bring upon hing/elf 9‘
want, dzfeaﬁ’s, trouble; but, on the contrary, endem‘

. ° This certainly excludes all that talk, which familiarizes
vice, takes oﬁ'those reﬁraints which men have from nature or
a modeft education, and is To utterly deltruﬁive of virtue, that
Iii/1011: banishes it out of the commonwealth. ‘OM: My aicxpe-
Mylar Eat Irie 06M», damp JAM w, hilt-51 "#034?" iEoejgm' is a;
yet; w'xieﬁ': 1.57m 5rd?» «*5; dexeﬁv at; vro‘ «are?! a‘u’nyfuc. “A law-
“giver ought above all things entirely to banish all filthy dif-
“conrfe outof acity, for men easily go from laying filthy things
“to doing them.”
. P True, manly reason: which is a very different thing from
that fuperﬁitious precisenefs, which carries things too far. As
v. g. when the Jews not contented to condemn 5151.1 ‘Ill‘l‘l.
“obfcene discourse,” or non m‘un. « filthy talk,” and
every where to express '“DNH iTill» “the heinoufnefs of the
“thing forbidden,” go so far as to comprehend under it
mum my mum Dam: nhp amnion. “that trifling,
“discourse which past'es betwixt a man and his wife;" and to.
add, ’13» n‘wnﬁ m: were: their two man. “that
9‘ bringing forth an idle word is like bringing forth idle feed."
There are other fayings of this kind to be seen, many of them,
among those, which R. E]. d: Vida: has collected: as that parti-v
cularly, '131 n‘non‘7 mash-1'7 n‘m 1m mm my p.
“that a man should not make an idle use of his eyes.” What
JEIz‘an reports of Amxagarw and others, belongs to this place;
that we} newer [dug/ya!: with many other unnecessary antler-i.
ties, which might be added. ‘
q ‘5 ‘13 “7 ‘JN TN DN- “.IfI don’t take care of’xnyv' .
3‘ ,self, who will take care of me E" P. An,
' ‘ ' war



.Tmlh‘ ‘Zelong‘i'ngfo '4 PrivateMant Cir. 321'
War to ..prwent them. and to provide for his own
ioghfprtable .ﬁtbﬂﬂence, as far as be can. withou; eon-
lmdz'ﬂing my truth ’ (that is, without denying mat-
ter: offaflyand (uch propositions,‘ as have beenal-
readyor \Sﬂiill'in the fequel here be sbewito be
true,‘ concerning. 6th:prpprerv,‘ the .ﬁiperiority of
(ea/'02:,  To explainjthis. limitation;  a man
should consider hieffect‘lf as obnoxious to hunger,
Weather,“injuries, disease‘srazgd the rq/i; then, to
fppply wants, take whatis his neighbour’s pro-
perty; and at last, in yindieation of hgirnfelf, say,
‘F  aegording to what I am, a being obnoxious
“A to hunger, €56. and to, aetotherwise would be
“incompliance vyith truthg” this would .not be
suﬂicient to justzify him. The grand rule requires,

I r' ngoa-J‘J’leu 973'?” [13' ’ou7c‘:'av.'y¢36v] 6 3i3'go’mjv@' ﬁig'mu’gau
J” a'aiv cu' urr‘alpc’hiv ivig'ymu 4-5: eﬁJ‘aupovlae. “Thch (enema!
““-_ goods) are heeeﬁ‘ary to the life of man, but virtuous actions
“lare necessary to his happiness." Anrsr. They, who treated
the‘boafy and things pertaining to'it as merely a’aaévrem, “fixings
‘“that did not‘belon‘g to them;" diitinguifhing between '71“
ip'o’logz. “‘ such‘ things as are our“own,” and wt? mi “#370;
“such as 'belong to the body;" making thefeilatte‘r to be
My 09?: Spit. “nothing to us," and leaving the body as it
were to 'itself (3:676 [ab/airﬂow] preparing—t? whirl-7cm)!“to
5‘ bc'foﬂicitous for itself,—if it suﬁ'crs anything 9”‘they, I say,
‘might enjoy their own philosophy;:but they would scarcezgain
«many profelytes now a days, or ever persuade people; that‘the
.Pains they "feel are‘not t/m'rr, or any thing to them. Nor indeed
do I much credit many stories that are told of form: old philo-
‘fophers: as that of Autumn/7m, when he was put to a'most
me! death by Nicurean (mix. pounded in amortar) 8' vanilla-07a
orig engaging, drift-unﬁt“we. 'Amfipxx 315M301, 'Avifapxov I)
.‘am'zm. ‘_‘ not valuing the puniﬂiment, cried out; -L-You
3“may beat the bag of Anaxarcbur, but you cannot strike
"‘ Anaxarrbm himself.” See Efiﬂ.ﬂrr. Simﬂ. Anton; D.L'acrt.
findpthcrs., . t. .. n i

t

l

'3'” -? ' V  that



O

322 TbeRanmN' of NATURE. S¢€t.IX.

that what, he does, should interﬁere with no truth}
but what he does interferes with fwmzl. For
taking that, which (by the ﬁJppoﬁtion) is his neigh-
lour’s, he acts as if it was not his neigbbvm’s, but
his own, and therefore plainly contradicts fail, and
‘ those truth: in feét. VI, VII. reﬁneé'tin‘g property 3
when, by not taking what is his neighbour‘s, he
would eontradiét no truth, he wouldfnot deny
himself to'be obnoxious to hunger, €291“. There are
other ways of furnishing himself with convenien-
cies, or at least neceﬂ'ai'ies, which are conﬁdent
with proper and all truth: and he can only be
said to deny hieffectlaf to be what be is by omitting to
provide against his wants, when he omits to pro; ‘
vide against them by some of tho/2* ways; and
then indeed he does do it. (See p. 46. Anf. to
Obj. 3.)
So again, when a man- does any thing to Mid
present' soffering or dangers contrary to the exprel‘s
.diEtates of teafon, and the tenor of forementioned
truths, he acts as afagﬂtiw being only, not as be-
ing what he walk is, jén/itz’m-mtionalis. But when
there is no good argument against his, doing of any
thing, that may gain him protection from evil,
or a better. condition of life, he may then look
upon himiblf omfy as a being, who needs that
which is 'to be obtainedby doing it: and in tbdt
(4/23, if he should not do it, he would be false to
himafelf, . and deny the circumﬂzances of his own
’nature. ’ 4 H "
;_ Certainly when a man 'may, without tray/firefly
,the'llimits prescribed consult his o‘wn'so’fety, sopa-
port, and reasonable fatisfaéﬁon, and  not;
find especially when hegtakes a counter-coud'e, and
exposes

fwd” winging to a Private Man, 551'. 323

éxpofeS himself ‘, he forgets may of the foregoing
truths, and treats himself as not king what he is.
This is true with respect to futurity, as well as the
preﬁntvtime: and indeed by how much future time
is . more than the present, by so much the more
perhaps ought ﬂat to be regarded. At least enjoy-
ments onght to be taken and adjusted in such a
manner, that 'no one should preclude, or fpoil
more, or greater to come.

It may easily be understood here, that those £22117,
which it is n01: in a man’s power to prevent, he
mut’c endeavor to bear patiently and dandy, i.e.
(as such; and moreover, such as are made by this
means ligbter ‘: for When they cannot be totally
prevented, as much of the-effect must be prevented,
or taken oﬂ’, as can be. And in order to this it is
good to be prepared for all attacks; especially the
1%, great one ". ~

3. He must con/ider even bodily and fag/11a] qﬁt-
tz'om, pqﬁom, and intimation: as intimatians, which
many times be not only mg, but mg!» to man m-
' What is said before of the subjection bf passions
and appetites to reason must always be aremembered.
They are not to proceed from unjustiﬁable came-s,
or terminate in wrong objects; not be unkaibn-
able or immoderate. Being tbu: regulated, let 'to a

‘ Ne qﬂ'eramu: no: periculi: fine care/a; qua alibi] pore/ii eﬂéAnl-
lien—In tranquil/o tempeﬂa‘tem «ﬁver/am optare dmenti:
“Nothing can be more foolifh than to run onrfelves into dan-
" gers without any reason.-He is a mad man that wiﬂies far
“a ﬁorm when the weather is good.” Crc.

‘ , t Le-vr'u: fit pqtientiayQuicguid carrigere gﬂ . rte/ax. “.What
f' cannot be quite cured, is made eaﬁer by patience.” Hon. .

‘1 MN" and“, “a meditation upon death," was a great

man‘s definition of pbiIo/bpb}.
true











3‘24 ﬂeRetIoION of NATbRE. Se'é‘tJX',

true biafs, and freed from all eruptions and via:
lente, they become such as are here intended; gen—
tle ferments warking in our breafts, without which
we should settle in inactivity "; 'and’ what I think
may be taken“for just motives and good arguments
toactupon. ' a ' '

For if a man finds, that he has not cub a supe-
irior faculty of reason, but al/o an inferi’or'appeti‘
tive faculty, under which are contained many pno-
.penﬁons and averﬁons, tbq/e cannot be denied ta I
'5: any more than that;' tho they must be taken- in-
deed for what they really are, and not more. When
they are checked by reason and truth, or there lies
a reason against them (as there always will, when
they are not within the foresaid restrictions), they
' must be taken as dog! with this circumitance, as
things overruled and diﬁzbled: but when they are
under no prohibition from the fupm'or power: and
.mttb; then they are to be- considered as unfetterd
and free, and become governing. principles. For
(as it has been observed upon a particular occap
lion before p. 309.) when there is no reason agaityi
the complying with our senses, there is always one
for it by prop. XIV. feét. III. the inclination it-
self, being precluded by nothing above it, is in this
case uppermo/l, and in course takes the command-
ing poft: and then a man must act as being what
he is in n. 3. under prop. 11.. of this feftion.‘ — U
A The springs of all human actions are in fact, ei-
ther a [case of duty, or a profpeét of ~ forrre pkg/yr:

w 'H anal-ne'wvnc‘v it“! J‘u} 61g“- “Anger—is to excite the
f‘ drowfy.” CHRYS.



Y'th oelonging to a Private Man, 6.9%.; 2 5

or profit to be obtained, some evil or danger to be
avoided; that is, either the reasonableness of what
is done, or the manner, in which something cloth
or is like to affect the agent: and that is again:
human aéHOns are founded either in reason, or pajl
ﬂan and inclination. ‘(I need .not add they may be
in both.) This being so, what should hinder, when
reason does not work, but that the inferior springs
Should retain their nature, and act?

Bodily inclinations and passions, when they ob-
serve their due fdbordz’notz’on to reason, and only
take place, where that leaves it Open for them, or
allows them to be as it were aﬂ‘eﬂ'ors to it‘ upon
the throne, are of admirable use in life, and tend
many time: to noble ends. This is applicable to the
irafcible, as well as the‘concupifcible affections and
the whole animal system. Love of that 'which is
amiable, compaﬁon "- - toward the miserable and
helplefs, a natural abborreme and refentment Y of

3‘ When the Stoics say, that a wife man may relieve one,
who wants his help, without pityz'ng him; I own indeed he
may, but I very much doubt whether he would. If he had not
some compaction, and in some measure felt the ails or wants of
the other, I fcaree know how he should come to take him for
an objeé'tof his charity. .

Y ‘0 (ain‘w' of: M, am‘ air A? ipwféfuva', 3"" J) a} air J‘Ii’, who.
4;; am geimﬁmuu'a'cm. “He is to be commended, .who is an-
“gry with those persons that he ought to be angry with, and
“for such things as he ought to be angry for, and in such a
,“manner, and in the pmper time, and only for fOJOng, as he
“ought.” ARIST. To be angry under these conditions is a
different thing from rage, and those Iraq/sort: which perhaps
scarce comply with any one of them ,: such as that of Alexan-
der, who, because his iesv'mw'. “beloved friend ” died, com-
manded the 'Ammn?» “temples of ﬁﬁulapiw” to be all

:burnt. Ann.

Y; ii that



326 TbeRBLmION of NATURB. Se&.IX.

that which is villainous or vicious or base 2, fear ‘,
of evils, are things, which duly temperd have Ian,
dable effects: and without them mankind could
not well fublil’t. By which it appears, that the Au...
thor of nature has placed these comtus’s, these ten;
dencies, and reluctancies in us, to difpofe us “for
aﬁion, when there are no arguments of a [uglier
nature to move us. So far are they, rz’gbtbv We
ringed, from being mere infirmities. And certainly
the pbilofopber, who pretends to abfolnte apathy,
maims nature, and fets up for a half-man, or I
don’t know what ".

I must confess however, that our pastiaz: are so
may up: to grow upon us, and become CXOl'bi-r
tant, if. they are not kept under an excess dig/afﬁne,
that by way of prevention or caution it is advie
fable rather to aﬁ'eét a degree of apathy, or to re-
cede more from the worse extreme 6, This very pros

.Poﬁtion

1 There is, according to Tull , Civil; aa’z'm, gnu ovum im-
prabo: odimw, “a public hatred, by which we have a]! wicked
“persons in general."

a tboCs’pte-a hum: oru‘ "Crab-99314331. oh Calm-d rut? mimic:
id‘afc’an, cm’av, '60”, Jamie", 34Mor.—i’m yet; 19335790070353. 1y;
tuév' “'5 “#3: «fixatier “We are afraid indeed of such
“things as are really dreadful;- and therefore we are afraid
“of all real evils, such as" difgracc, poverty, diseases, want of
“friends, and death --It is right to be afraid of some things,
v‘ and wicked not to be afraid of them.” 'Aius'r. When one.
called Xenopbaxe: coward, because he would not play at dice
with him, Spoke”? oat'w Jane‘s Jun #6“n? 6301953) 5.701;:35
“he owned that he was a coward, and had no courage, with
“regard to things that are wicked.” PLUT.

l? A wife man is not iii-435:. “entirely without‘passions, but

gﬂwmé‘ric, “has them in a moderate degree.” AR 151‘. up.
Ding. L. ‘- i

C A0773! Toxaﬂmnr r13 ,uica dzoxupli'v r5 pianor imﬂian-Irir 3m)
Jag", vro‘ pit 39h dyaﬂaaé’hejr' 76‘ 1‘3 ﬁfhr. “He who aims ata
J ' u _“



sfrat/3t beleaging' to a Private Man, (9’5, 32 7

polition itself, which, when reason is abilent, places
12% and inclination in the chair, obliges not to per-
mit the reins to our passions,or give them their full
carreer; because if we do, they may (and will)
carry us into such emﬂér, such dangersiand mif-
cbieﬁ, as may fadly affect the sensitive part of us:
that part itself, which now governs. They ought
to be watched,-, and well .examined: ifreq/an is on
their fide, or stands neuter, they are to be heard
, (this is all, that I say): in other cast we must be
deaf to their applications, strongly guard against:
their emotions, and in due time prevent their rebel-
 against the fpvePeign faculty.

I cannot forbear to add, tho sfear I shall tire
you with repetitions, that from what is said here
and jufc before, not only the liéerty men take in
prefer-ring what they like best, among. present in.
joyments, meatS, drinks, 69%. To far as, they are in-
nocent; but all those ﬁrudemial and lawful methods,
by which'they endeayour to fecure to themselves a
comfortable and pleasant being, may be justiﬁed,
and, that obi; under “prop. XIII. in ea. II.
strengthend. ‘ . . ~

“medium, should depart from that (extreme) which is most
“' contrarypzwfor one of the two extremes has more of vice in
“it than‘the Other.” Airman-In the same chapter he gives
two other excellent rules, which I cannot but set down here.
22.9103} “7 are": i «the? Idem-cine! icpor'u-a‘e caduu’liov J“inn/18‘:
domaiuiimp pi riﬂes-compact «'51 film: 61:31:17.: conic-n. “We
‘9 ought to couﬁder what (vices) we are most inclined to,---
“’and‘to bend outtakes to the -contrary;-.—as they do, who
“endeavor to make crooked ﬂicks ﬂrait.” And after, '11!
quilt ﬂ plus-u Quantﬂiov «'6 5h),  “stir Muir 8' yelp «Mus-u ed-
nmuw’vniv. “In every thing, we should take great care as to
‘5 the plcafure of it; for we are very apt to have our judg-
ff meat corrupted by pleasure.” , _ , ‘ 2
Y 4 If

i



328 ‘IZMRELIGIO‘N quA-rUREQ Seé'teIX.

If the‘gratification of an appetite be incompatie
ble with reason and truth, to treat that appetite ac-
cording to what it is, is to deny it: but if it is not!
to use it as it is, is to consider it as an appetite clear‘
of all objeéiions,‘ and this must- be to eompb with
it. The humming ofsuch appetites; as lie not un—
der the in’terdiét of trnth and ieaibn, seems- to“be«
the very means, by which “the Author of nature in-
tended to [weeten the journey of life: and a man
may upon‘ the roadas we'll mu'ﬂie hirnfelf up against
fun-thine and blue ﬂcy; and expofe himself bare to
rains and f’eor-ms and cold; -as'~ debar himself of the
innocent delight of his nature for aﬁ'efted melan-L
cho’ly: want, and pain. Yet,‘ ' A -'

4'. He—m‘ufi uj‘e what meam‘ be can to cure- bisewn-f
defeat, or at least to prevent the eﬂ'eﬁs of them; learn
to - deny temptations, . or 'keep them at a proper dif-
temee ";. even mortijfv, where mo'rtiﬁeatim is neeef- .
ﬁzry ° -,, and-41204}: carry about bin 3tlte jenfe  his
hing beta man. He who does not“do thisQr-d‘oth
not conform himself to the feventb particularhnder
the preceding prop. (dothenot own that. to be true,

d 'A'ytmmlqn Mixet 75v éeﬁaxpﬁv mama-367 6 i’ejue, arms; Z9»:
3:; 359:1: wﬁclvxaic- "‘ When love was got to theest of Agfﬁe
“law, it ﬂood then at the doorof his mind." Max, Tm“-..
To appoint things, as thcyerpvi/é 'dofiors have done, to be .1“D
7311115: ‘F a fence for the law,"‘orD,‘1z~zn DR p‘ﬁﬂﬂh ‘12
ﬁ‘i‘lpﬂ It: ‘5‘ to remove men as far as can be from £11,,“
would be right,.'if they were .judicioufly-chosen, andnot so
very particular and trifling. Some of; theirioautions arecer-
tainly jua:- as that mum sum mum. trim ‘73nom‘7
E33 WPJ‘ ID s1111391, “Awman should not trifle with another
“man’swife, net with nakednefs; leii he be enfnared by-
« them." Paﬂz'm. a - a ' - . *

Pp Whatﬁould 4 mg» do to '[iriig‘a 1:33;; 1130‘; '6 Shaun he
5:! “destroy himself?” [Mg/7m. ~ I ‘ ""‘j ‘ ' " , 3;:

"  ‘ which.

5—91,
--



'Trutbs belonging to a Private Man, 59’5- 329

which he is supposed to have found true in him-
feif); denies a dcfeﬂ to be what it is, to be some-
thing Which requires to be fuppliéd,’ or'amended go-
and is guilty of an amg'ﬂz'on’, that~wiﬂ ,fall under
feet. I. prop. V. ' ' ~ .

I might here mention so‘me precautions, with
some kinds and‘ degrees of mortiﬁcéztion or ﬁéf-de-
nial, which men will commonly find to be necef.
fary. But I ﬂiall'not prq/‘crz'be, leaving them, who
bei’c know their own weak places and diseases, to
feleét for themselves the proper remedies.

' I shall only take notice, that since the ﬁlﬁa’enial
here recommended can only respect things in them-
sElves lawful and not unreasonabl'e, and in favor of
such our bare inclinations» haVC been allowed to be
taken for arguments and direBcions, it looks as if
this advice to dany m’: [elf or inclination: inferred a.
contradiction. But this knot‘ will be quickly. un-
tied. For when we deny our inclinations in order
to better our natures, or prevent crimes, tho to fol-
low those inclinations might .otherwise be right;
yet in tbqk (imam/lance: and under this view there'
arises a good reason against it, and they, according
to the q/iablgﬂid rule, must: therefore give way:
which is all that is intended ‘.

I he last clause of the proposition takes in a great
Mpaﬁ. It will oblige men, if they do but think
well what tiny are, and consequently what other: of-
the same kind with themselves also are, not to be
proud, conceited, vain; but modef’c, and humble, .
and rather ,diﬂident of themselves: not to Cenfure
the failings of others too hardly, not to be over-

’1’ N 0 mm, no superl’citious or phantaliical mortifications
are here recommended. '
‘ - ' fevers

139 The RELIGIQN of NAT UR E. Seéth.
swere in punishing or exacting justice 8, and par-
tieularly not to be rwengeful; but Candid, pla-
eable, manfuete: and so forth. .

.I 5. H; ought to examine " his awn action: and can-
duﬂ, and wbere he find: be bu: tranjgnﬂéd ‘, to. re-
pent. That is, if the tranfgreﬂion be against: his
neighbour, and the nature of it admits, to make
repaetion, or at lﬂaﬂ as far ashe tan: in other
oaks, when that which is done eannot be recalled,
or .rgpaird, or terminates in himself only, to live
however under a sense of his fault, and to prove
by such acts as are proper, that he desires forgive-
zqﬁ, and heartin withes it undone; which is as it
were an eﬂiay towards the undoing of it *, and all
that now can be I: and“lastly, to Me all Pomblc
care not to Map/2. All this is involved in the idea
of a fault, or aftion that is wrong, ate it presents it-
ieif to a rational mind. For fuel) amind cannot,
approve what is unreasonable, and repugnant to

: x mm mum taue‘v. rum may men, “the mer-
‘5 ciful man does good according to the best of his judgment,"
(which words I underl’cand in the sense, that Raj/bi seems to
put upbn them, Gen. xliv. IO.) ‘

. I! my enigma; w J" 39064:; or! put (in 8‘1. ﬂair-3a.; “Wherein
“have I tranfgrelfed? and What havel done? wherein have
N I failed in what was my duty B”-Aur. Carm.

_ 1 TI; yaip a’: e5: dyﬁm «ii ﬁfe ouptASan‘r ﬁlm-wt? ipayt; wit J‘a'x
gmmuMVSelcg Whip» 0' pa) canine. “For who has, gone
“through the eiropit of life, and kept his loge; nay, who is
f‘ there that has not fallen quite down? He is a happy map.
‘f if he has not done so a great many tixnes." PH. Jun. ,
l ’1 Qgem pm:th peaaﬂ, pch sﬂ innocem. “He; that repents
“‘ of his crime is almolt innoeent.” SEN.

- 3Even a 7m rays, nu:pr ‘73 am n‘npw mam].
s‘ that repentance may . be weighed againii any facrifice.”
S. Hm“? ‘

4, ‘ i ' truth 5

“In



Truths belonging" to a Private Man, (do.; 33‘

truth; that is, what is wrong, or a fault: nay more,
it cannot but‘di'fapprove it, detest it. No rational
animal therefore can act according to truth, the
true nature of himself and the idea of a crime, if
he does not endeavor not to commit it; and,
when it? is committed, to repair it, if he can, or at
least show himself to be peniteat “',

' If when a man is criminal, he dOth not behave
himself as such; or, which . is the same, behaves
himself as being not fact), he Oppofes (rut!) conﬁe
dently. I -

And further, to act agreeably to what he is sUp-
pofed to find himself to be, is to act as one who is
in danger of relapﬂng: which is to be upon his
guard for the future.

' 6. He mtg/f labor to improve 17is rational faculties
if furl: means, as are (fairly) praﬂioable by bios,
and ooigﬂﬂont with his oiroumﬂanm. If it be a dif-
advantage to be obnoxious to error, and act in the
dark“, it is an advantage to know such truth: as
may prevent this: if so, it is a greater advantage
to know, or be ca able of knowing, more such
truths n: and then again, not ,to endeavor to im—
prove those. faculties, by which these tritth are ap-
prehended, is to [but them out, as being not what
they are °.

‘ I! ’Ekoll‘ipuq'ats stiAoyyo-qv' ia-Morirﬂwar; iwltiQ" WIS-hart;
yés‘woor. “Have you spoke evil of any man? speak well of him
“for the future. Have you over—reached any man? make him
‘ 9‘ fatisfaction. Have you been drunk? then fall.” St BASIL.

'1 "Es-t nip on? 5:75 urhoroplam‘ytﬂ! t’riﬁdo “For philofoPhy
" is really the belt of all poﬂ'eﬂions.” 1051‘. M.’

0 And perhaps as if our own minds were not what they are.

For arcing: 113597”: «ﬁ-dﬁvm Bgiyoﬂau mica, “all men have na-
g‘ turally a thirﬂ; after knowledge.” ' ARIS'f.

And



332 We RELIGION ofNA'rt‘Hts. Se&.IX.

And moreover,“by the enlargement of our ra-

tional faculties we become more rational; that is.
we advance our natures P, and become more at-
tentive to rational iry'oyments. .
_ ~The ordinary means indeed of improving our
minds, are the- inﬁruétion of able men, "reading,
.observation, meditation: but every man has not
proper opportunities, or capacity for these, or but in
fome_lmv degree;' and no man isobliged‘beyond
his abilities, and opportunities (by feét. IV. prop.
II.) Therefore that mollification is added, by such
means, etc. - -

.Beside bealtb, a comfortable and suitable provio
lion of external: is so necessary to the well-being
of the tubal: man, that without it the rational part
cannot dwell easy, all pursuits of knowledge will
be liable to interruption, and improvements (com-
monly), imperfect 9. And lo reason itself (which
cannot betray its own interel’c) must; for its own
fake concur in feeking and promOting that.
which tends to the preservation and happiness of

p ﬂrz'ﬂarle being asked, ¢_what I): got 6} Milo/5‘96], answered,
Tc‘ drfﬁl¢JxTac cot-7' E lrmr Jul Ire‘v are #8! ﬁpar 96C" omit”,
“To do that without being commanded, which other people
“‘ do out of fear ofuthre laws.” And another time, law:17:
learned dffvrd from the art/earned, laid, 'Ocq of firm e5: «us-n-
xo'rrm. 'ﬂ‘w onul‘eiav E'er 3: [air ou‘rruxluc that depict, rim-dig ail-ruli-
an: “unﬁt. “As much as the livingdo from the dead, Learn-
“ing, lie/aid, was an ornament to men when they were in
“prosperity, and a refuge for them to flee to when they were
“in adversity.” D. LAERT. - l

q 'Acfu’m'roy Mi).; 8' 54120:, eat? qua‘ cedrr’lm «Txopiiyn'ror 3""?
walk? pirya‘p nah-7nd: xaﬁdmp J‘i induct, urn. “It is impoﬂlble,
“at leal’t it is very difficult for a man to do much good, if he
‘“want the necell'aries of life; for many things are done as it
5’ were by instruments.” Aaxsr.

the



Truths belonging to a Private Man, 554; .333
the Mole. But the doing of this ingrolTes time and
indufh‘y 3‘ and before that which is fought 'can be
obtained (if'it isrever obtained), probably the 2]? of
it is lof’c: .except where men live by the profeﬁion
of some part of learning. ' - ' l

.' And as to them who are aorefreg from'w'orldly
cares, or whose business and employment brings
them into a fh’ié‘tcr acquaintance .vvithxlettersg. after
all their endeavors (such is' the "great'varie‘ty of
human circumstances in other rq/peﬂs)»they mu-ﬁ
be. contented.,with several .dtgrm- ahdzportz'am of
knowledge.;Some are blefl: with clean and sbong
constitutions, . early inﬂrué‘tio’ns and 'bther helps,
succeeding incour'agements, -useful. acquaintance,
and freedpm fnom difturbance: swhilst others, un-
der an ill slate-9f body, or otherzdisadvantages, are
forced tobe their own. guides, and make their way
aswellasthey,can.- - 1.  . -;. ~ ~

But notwithltanding all this, every manmay in
same degrzewi other endeavor, to c'ultivatehis na-
ture, and poﬂ'efs himself of useful truths. Andnht
to do this is (again) to caft ojﬁ' reason (which'ne-
ver can be reafahable), apof’catize from humanity,

and recoil into the beﬁial life ’.
_ 7. He must attend to inﬂrutzion ‘, and weii aﬂ
advice; eﬁecially in matter: of conﬁguem'e. Not to
. - . do

.

’ Nam ﬁrit guoddam tepzpw, cam in agri: bamz‘ne; paﬁm éqﬂiw
rum mdo «vagabantzir, és’c. “For there was a time, when men
. “wanderd about the fields just; as the beacts do now, Um".
' Clo. ' "

' ' The eﬁ'eﬁ, which Xmocram’sleﬁure had upon Paloma, f3 .
'remarkable: unit: argtioni: jaluéerrina maﬁciaa , fauna, ex
itfam' gamma lithium pbilofopbu: cam/if. f‘ He was reliored

. f‘ by



334. ﬁrRxL’texon quATURE. Se&.IX.

do this is to day, that his faculties are limited and
defective', or that he is fallible (which is tantra)
to that, which he is presumed'to beconscious of);
and perhaps, that it is possible for another to knew
what he does not.

Mr: every than is capable of hearing, and the
meaner a man’s own improvements-are, the more
does truth preﬁ him to submit to the counfel and
Opinions of Others. "Nor is every one only capaﬁle,
but every one want: upon some occasions to be in-.
formed. In 'how many country aﬂhim wait the
[Ebolar take the ruﬂir for his matter? In how many
Other men of business, trader: and mechanics 9" And
on the ether tide, in refpea: of how many things
does the generality of the world [want to be taught
by them, who arctlearned and bang? P-

T here is or should ‘be a camera or interchange
of coun'fel and knowledge, as well as of! other
things: and where men have not thel'e of their ewn
growtb, they should thanksully receive what may
be imported frotmother quarters. ‘

l do not mean, that a man ought implicitly and
blindly to follow the Opinion of «another ‘ (this 0'4
ther being fallible too, as well as himself), unless
he has in him/Elf a good reason so to do, which
many times happens; but by the allit’tance of ano~
ther, and hearing what he has to say, to find out

4‘ by the melt wholfome physic of one oration, and from
“an infamous debadchee became a very great philosophét.”
VAL. M. ' ' ‘

t Like them, Who submit to their Hbaiamim, “wife men,”
«31 5mm mm: sW ‘73; how 1'719z. “though they
, " shon affirm‘a man’s right hand to be his left.” In S. If-
gmr. Many more Enhances might easily be given; '

moi:

Truth: imaging to a Private Man, (9:. 33‘;
more certainly On which side rwﬁm, trail), and
happiness (ivhich’ aIWays keep close together)
lie. Andthus it is indeed a man’s m red/ion at
la‘it, which goV’erns. _ ' y'  i
' ' .He', who is 'governed by"what another says (or
does) withow: under-standing it "and making‘the
'reason Eof it his "own, is not governed by his own
info», 'and that is, by-np reafwz that be buy. To say
one is led by the mole (as wecommonly'speak“)
gives immediately the’idea ofa brute ". '

Lastly, He Muff 14hr to. dear his mind of Iboﬁ
preoccupation: and incnmbmme; 3017M; bang 'aéout
it, and binder bim frat); reasoning freely, and'juaking
impartialb. We fer out in life from soch pooﬁbel-
ginnings of knowledge, and grow upun’der ﬁtch
remains of fuperstirion and ignorance, such inAn-
ences of company and faihion, soch inﬁnuations

" Not only we. T5: 506: zmosau, “To lead a man by the
"‘ mole,“was 'used in the same sense by the Greek. - . 7

' Nibil praﬂandum eﬂ, grain qt, pecorm rim, fegaa,
mar antecedentz'um gregtw, per-gent“no); qua tandem qﬂ, ﬁd qua
itur. “We ought to take the greatell care, not like cattle, to
“follow the crowd that go before, and (0 go where others
“go, and not where we mould go.” San. Somedﬁng may
perhaps be expeé'ted in this place concerning wage: and frgﬁiq},
which seem to be public declarations of same general opinion;
lhewing how far they ought to sway with us. I think, ﬂfar
as to keep us from being contemned, derided, ‘Or marked,
where that may lawfully and conveniently be done”; efp‘eci-
ally in respect of trifling and little matters. Bat ﬁrs/yer; wife
man will fearce mind them. That is a good sentence in De:
mpbilu, note a? name that and, a}: 00:31! ping: wiloflrur 5m?-
AO' 7139 was: uh? virgiypa’lQ' 5x395 “D0 those things that
“you yourself judge to be right, though men may have an ill
“Opinion of you for so doing; for the multitudezare yery ill
3‘ judges of what is right.” . ' . i “I — 5 ‘

0*

of



3.36 7'11: RzLIoIoprNA‘I'unz; Se&.lXa

of pleasure, €9’c. that it is no, wonder,- if men get
habits of thinking only in one way; that these ha-
bits in time grow confirmed and. obstinate; and To
their minds come to be overcalt with thick prg'u.
dim, scarce penetrable. by any ray  truth or light
.of reason. He dietefore, whowoulduse his ratio-
nal faculties, must in the first, .placei‘difentangle
them, and render them fit to be. used: and he, who
does not do this, does hereby declare, that he does
not intend to use. them; that. is,  proclaims him-
self irrational, contrary to truth,‘if suppositionthe
fourth'be tifue. M ‘ ‘ 1 .1 . _ .

- he sum of all is 7:_ it is the duty of. every
man, if wordegtpreﬁ'es such a being as is be-
fore described, to behave himself in all respects
(which I cannot pretend to enumerate) as far as he
is able according to reason. ' And from hence it will
fullow, further, that, H '

IV. Eveiy man *is obliged to live virtuoujb' and
 ' Because to practice reason " and bulb 7 is
'to live after that manner. or from the contents
of the foregoing feé‘tions it is apparent,- that one
cannot practice reason (or act according to truth)
without behaving himself reverend}, and dutiﬁdb’
toward .' that Almighty being, on whom he de-
pends; nor WithOUt ju/iz'ce and a tender regard to
the properties of Other men: that is, unless his in-
joymentsbe free from impiety, virtuous and harm;

* Ipﬁzwirtu: Bafﬁn!) r354 ratio did potqﬂ. “Virtue may
.“briefly be called right reason.” C to. Q19: mm aliud eﬂ gua‘n
raga ratio. “It is nothing else but right reason.” SEN.

7 Ida» sﬂ}: dicebat Socrates weritatem s9’ wirtutem. “Socrates
f‘ said, that virtue and truth were the same thing.” Id.

less



Trail): belongig to a Private Man, etc. 337 _
1efs. And as to those virtues, which respect a man’s
ﬂlf, the same thing 1 Will be as apparent, when I
have told what Lmean by some of the principal
ones. a. .

Prudence, the mural of virtues, is nothing but
choosing (after things - ‘. have been duly 'weighd)
and using the most reasonable means to obtain
some end, that is reasonable. This is.therefore dz;
ra‘fly the exercise of xeafon.

A .ﬂ'empemnce permits us to take meat and drink
nor only as physic for hunger and thirst, but also
as an innocent gordz’nl and fortifier against; the evils
of life, or even sometimes, reason not refusing that ’
liberty, merely as matter of pleasure. It only con-
ﬁnes us to' such kinds, quantities, and fen/ans, as may
belt consist with our health b, the use of our facul-
ties ‘, our fortune, €9’c. and ihew, that. we do not
think ourselves made only to eat and drink here " 3
that is, such as speak us to be what we are.

Cbaﬂiéy

2 Viz. That a mancannot praé‘tife reason’without praftiling
them.
it Ta! rr' “17¢, 11'. vr' icaémm, 03' 'r’ io’ﬂat. “The things that
“are, the things that will be, and the things that have been.”
b That laying of Timotbeu: to Plato, with whom he had
supped the night before. in the Academy, should be remem-
berd. 'Tpc'ic act J‘ew'nl'n—eis (nip detain—infect» “This supper
“will be of great use to us to-morrow (from the conversation
“we have had.") Jp. ATHEN. ‘
‘- Codm: amt/inn: Hgﬂerni: «vitiz': animwn guogue pregra-‘vat -
1012:, Eric. “A body overcharged with yeﬁerday’s vices is a
“load upon the mind also, Sic.” Hon.
‘1 szibu: in/Uo miwena'i can/"a palate e/I. “Who live only to
"‘ please their palates.” JUV. Sic pmndet: comrnz'litone: tan.
3mm apud infirm tanaturi. “Come, fellow-soldiers, let us
3‘ din: to day in such a manner, as if we expeé‘ted to sup
. ff amongﬁ





338 TIMR'ELIGION of'NATURE. Seal);

Chafiin does. not pretend to extingmﬂ: our tender
passions, or cancel one part'of our nature: it only
bids us not. to. indulge them: against: reason and
truth °; net give up the man to humor the émte ‘,
nor hurt other: to please our/21v“; to divert our
inclinations- by business, or some honeﬂ: amuse-
ment, till we can gratify them lawfully conveni-
ently, regulaily'g; and even then to participate of
the myfieries of love with modesty, as-within a
veil or sacred inclofure, not with a canine impu-
dence ". h ' '

“amongﬁ the dead.” (LEONID. up. Val. Max.) may be turned
to-a general memento, no man knowing, how near his death
may be.

6 Ti Jag—mm "Emmy: ¢6v “16m. “What is it you look
“upon .P—a beautiful woman. Observe the rule (of right.“)
ARR. .

f Venenm firm-tam rppz'entes, moreﬁrarum. “Laying hold
“of any women they meet, like beasts.” Hon.

g In which words are comprehended naturally (T6. (4% «dc.
cage ou'a’n Mme: Jm’um, “not to pursue pleasures in an unna-
“rural way”)

’1 Not as Crate: and Hipparclvia (of whom see Diag. L. Sext.
Emp. s9’ a1.), and indeed the Cynic: in general are said to have
done: quibu: in [Impatqu wire cum conjugibm mo: fuz't, “who
“used to lie with their wives in public.” LAC'I‘. O'f whom
therefore Cicero .says with good reason, Cynicoram ratio [aL
antic] tota qﬂ ejz'cienda.  enim inimica «veracwzdice, Ane qua
721'sz reAnm gﬂi’ pole/i, m'lyil bongAnm. “The method (/5772: (0--
“pie: 17am: it, the nation) of the Cynics, ought entirely to be
“rejeé‘ted; for they are enemies to modeﬁy, without which
“nothing can be right, nothing virtuous." ‘ 11'1sz LIN
NDJEJ [w‘N] NIP. “A man should go in unto his wife in
“private.” 3. HHAS. That in Herodatm, "Ape: “39%? wqu
eunuch/’04: Kg) wig «Ma? yum, “that a woman should put ofi'her‘
""modefiy with her cloaths,” ought not to be true. Verecun-
did‘nagtzra/i [1.153722 fromy'um lupanaria ipfaﬂcretum. “Ewen
‘3 fuéiz'c ﬂerw: have a private place provided, out of natural
' ‘j modestyﬁ St Ausr. " ‘ “1

' ‘ ' ‘ - Frugalzy



Truth whinging. so a Private Man, He.; 39'

Frugaz’z’ty indeed looks forward, and round a,
bout; not only considers the man bimﬂzlf, but com-
Pactionates his famiég; ’knows, that, when the ex-
aé‘tel’t computation is made that can be beforehand,‘
there-Will still be found many unforeseen dyideram
in the calendar of hisexpences; is appre/aerzﬁve of
the world, .and accidents, and new oceaﬁons, that
may arise, tho they arelnot yet. in being i; and
therefore endeavors wiser to lay in as much, as
may give him Tome kind of security againl’c future
wants and cafualties, without which provision no
man,“whose sense is no: quite 10%, or c‘ircum-g‘
fcribed within the ,present minute,_can be very
easy “. To this end it not only: cuts OE all profu-
ﬂan and extravagance, butleven . deduéirs something
from that, which according to the present appear:‘
ance might be aﬂ'orded 1 g‘ and chooses rather that
he should live upon half allowance now, than be
exposed (or expofe any body else) to thednng‘er of
ﬁarving hereafter m, when full meals and former
plentyihall make poverty, and fat/ling more infupg'
portable. But still it forbids no inflame of gmu
reﬁt), or even magnificence, which is agreeable tq

1 Bit «'0‘ wit 111x»: a'ltxpolﬂh image-ac. “Providing‘for tong
“tingences that we cannot so much as guess at.” PH. JUD. ’

1‘ Simonide: was wont to say, Bani/4W a‘iv afa'oS’azvalv anaemia
,ui‘iuov make-077‘,; sSr $07631: e61 MAM, “[had rather leave
“something ‘to my enemies when I die, than want friends‘
“‘ while I am alive.” STOB.

1 Non intelligunt bamz'ne: gucim magnum ‘vec‘ﬁgal/z't‘patﬂmonia.‘
“Men don’t understand how great a revenue fpaﬁngnefs i333.
Clc. ‘ _

m Like them, who c': or? m’mﬂ: vrai a? wig»: ie'JJ‘m, «ennui-emf
Alena": “in their youth devoured the provifion that should
if have supported them in their old age,” as in ATHEN.

Z a. the}





34o The RELIGION ofNA'rURE. SeétJX'.

the man’s fixation and circumstances, or (which is
tantamount) to the truth of his case “.

After the same manner I might proceed upon
Other particular virtues. Buc my notion of them
must by this time be sufficiently understood: and
therefore I 111311 only give this general advice. That
you may take the truer profpeé't of any act, place
yourself in your imagination beyond it (beyond it -
in time), and suppose it already done, and then see
how it looks; always remembring, that a long re-
pentance is a difproportionate price for a [hart £72qu-
ment. Or, fancy it done by some otlaer man, and
'then view it in that fleeulam: we are commonly
lharper-fighted in discerning the faults of others,
than of ourselves °. And further, as to those vir-
rues, which are laid to consist in the mean, it may
be sometimes fafer to incline a little more to one of
the extremes, than to the other: as, rather to ﬂin-
ginefs, than prodigality; rather to inﬂexibility, and
even a degree of ill nature, than to dangerous com-
plaifanCe, or eaﬁnefs in respect of vice, and such
things as may be hurtful; and so on P.

e _ Since

'1 Ea liberalitate utamar, glue prq/it amide, accent nemiai.
“We should use such, liberality, as may be of advantage to
“our friends, but not to the hurt of any body else.” th.

° New e]? imammadum, guale quadg;--:fit, ex alii: judirare: at
[lama dedereat in aliir, witemu: s9’ ipﬁ. Fit enim erg/tic qua mode,
at magi: in alii: “mamas, gleam in Mai/met ip/is,  quid delinqui—
tar. “It is by no means an ill way of judging of any thing,
“by seeing how it looks, in others; so that, if any thing is
“'unbecoming them, we may avoid it ourselves. For I don’t
“know how it is, but we are apt to see faults in others more
“than in ourselves.” th.

P Olav, iv J‘eimqn 3107179! We Jim ix"?!; psi hearts?“51qu aren’-
gdpg An’liv, Jami Milain 11‘ “New” act» “As if, at an entertain-

“meat,



‘Trutb: éelongz’ng to a Private Man, £36. 34.!

Since then to live virtuoujly is to practice red/0‘»
:and a€t conformably to male, he, who lives so,
must be ultimately happy, by feét. II. prop. XIV.
and therefore not only the commands of reason,
but even the desire of happiness (a motive, that
ﬁannot but work strong-ly'upon all who think) will.
oblige a man to live so.

It may be collected even from experience, that
the virtuous lg'fe compared with the contrary, if one
looks no further than the present Rate, is the Imp-
pier life 9; or, that the virtuous .pleasures, when
the Whole account is made up, are the truer '. Who
fees not, that the vitiou: life is full of dangers and
folic-itudes, and usually ends ill; perhaps in rotten-
ness and rags, or at least in a peevifh and defpi-
cable difcontent ’ E‘ ' ~ '

I am not of 'opinion, that virtue can make a
man happy upon a rack ‘, under a violent fit of

‘ the

“ment, any one drinks to another that has drank enough, he
“ought not to be out of countenance, nor force himself, but
f‘ refuse the cup." ‘PLUT.

‘1 Even Epicurw himself «Raises-or our) Iris W015: “nit iit'l‘l‘ﬂ (45-
m: “says that it is virtue only that is necessarily attended with
“pleasure;”. and (like “nit “built «'03: aipnalc 307v «2970-341, ‘7 that
“we ought to chuse virtue for the fake of such pleasure."
onc. LAE'RT. '

' Ifacrate: gives one reason for this, where he compares vi—

.tious pleasures with virtue. ’Eu'iﬂh "'03?" 3‘9‘"“"7"‘P°' m”
miSmpu‘ iwaﬁ'S'd. 4‘) lane? we}: Adam: weir silent: ixoxuv. “In the one
“case, we have the pleasure first and the uneasiness after-
“wards; in the other case (that of virtue) we have the unea—
“ﬁnefs ﬁrlt, and the pleasure afterwards.”

3 Whereas virtue is inﬁd‘m are}: 75392:. “like provision which"
“will maintain us till we are old." Bus ap.S. Ba]: 4

t For who can bear such rants as that, Epicum: ait, ﬂzpierzﬂ
teem, [i in Plan/aria”: tauro peruratur, ext/amatzerm, Dulce e/t,

Z3 s5’-



'342 The RELIGION OfNIiTURE. Se&.IX.

the Prone, or the like “-, or that virtue and prudence
can always exempt him from wants and sufferings,
mend a strait fortune, or rectify 'an ill constitution;,
amidl’: so many enemies to virtue, so many'inﬁr-
mities as attend life, he cannot but be fametime: af—
fettea'. But I have said, and say again, that the m-
tural and zrfual efi'eft of virtue is happiness; and if
avirtuous man should in some respects be unhappy,
yet still his virtue will make him left unhappy: for
at least: he enjoys inward tranquillity, and a brealt
conscious of no evil. And which kind of life I
pray ought one to prefer: that, which naturally
tends to happiness, tho it may be dif’curbed; ‘or
that, which uaturally tends to unbappimfr .? In
brief, virtue 'will make a man bare, in-any given
circumstances, as happy as a man can be in those
circumf’tances: Or however it will make him happy
'bereafter in some Other state: for ultimately, all
taken together, happy he must be.

Some may possibly wonder, why among virtues
I have not so much as once named one of the car-
dinal, and the only one perhaps Which they pre-
tend to: I mean fortitude; That that, by which

s9’ adme niliilpertiaet? “Epicurur lays, that, if a‘wife man
“were burnt alive in P/Jalaris‘s bull, he would cry out, How
“agreeable a thing is this, and it does not affeﬁ me at all 2”
SEN. Tully reports the same.

'1 It is in the power of very few to act like him, gal dun
avarice: exﬂraada: preaeret, lager: liarum- petj/Ewerawit, “who
‘.‘ continued reading in a book, while: they were cutting
“fwellings out of his legs:” or him, gui non liq/ii! ridere, dun
ob [Jar ipﬁtm irati tor-tore: omm'a iuﬂrumeata‘ crude/itati: experi-
mztur, “whocontinued laughing, tho his tormentors, who
“were enraged at him for it, tried all their instruments of
f‘ cruelty upon that very account.” SEN.

fol



Tmté: deiongt'ng to a Private Man, etc. 34.3

lb many heroes have triumphed over enemies, even
the greatest, deatb itself; that, which dil‘tinguishes
nations, raises empires, has been the grand theme
of almost all wits, attracts all eyes, opens all mouths,
and aﬂ'umes the name of virtue by ,Way of excel-
l’ence‘; that this should be forgot!

To attone for this omifﬁon I will make this ap-
pendix to the foregoing brief account. If fortitude
be taken for natural courage (2'. e. strength, activi-
ty, plenty of spirits, and a contempt of dangers re-
fulting from these), this is conflitution and the gift
of God w, not any virtue in us: because if it be our
virtue, it must conﬁl’t in something, which we pro-
duce, ordo ourselves ". The case is the same with
that of fine features and complexion, a large inhe-
ritance, or strong walls, which may indeed be great
advantages, but were never "called virtues 3’. To
have t/aefe is not virtue; but to uﬁ: tiaem rightgy, or
according to reason, if we have them. '

That this is justly said, may Perhaps appear
from what is to be said on the ot/aerﬁde. It may
be a man’s misfortune, that he has not more ecu;
rage, a greater flock of spirits, firmer health, and

W Bipa'm nap'len; Scat, 810': as 602 'I'c’y' Manur- “If you are
“a very valiant man, yet it is the gift of God that you are
“so.” HOM.

3‘ Propter wirtutemjure laudamur, 59’ in rvirtute reﬂe- glariae
mur. 25m! non contingent, ﬂ id donum 5. Dec, non £1 nobis lla-
bercmus. “We are jul‘tly commended upon the acgount of our
“virtue, and it is right in us to boaﬁ: of our virtue; which it
“would not be, if it were 172a gift of God, and we had it not
f‘ from omﬁl-ves.” Cxc.

Y As that word is used here. For when it is used as in that
up. Luc. 'Apmi p‘e‘v caiy¢7©' 307(3):; “virtue is the strength of the
.“body," and the like pali'ages, it has another meaning.

Z 4 stronger



344 ‘IZMRELIGION ofNA'rUREQ Se€t.IX's

stronger limbs, if he‘ has a just: occasion to use
them; but it never can be reckoned a vice or fault
not to 21/63 what he has not: for oth‘erwife it might
be acrime not to be able to carry ten thoufand pound
weight, or outrun a cannon-ball.

Fortitude considered as a virtue consists in stand-
ing and endeavoring to overcome dangers and op-
poﬁtions, when they cannot be avoided without the
violation of red/en and truth. Here it is, that he,
who is endowd with natural bravery, a healthful
constitution, good bones and muscles, ought to
15/2 them, and be thanksul to the Doner: and he
who is nor so favored, must yet do what be can: if
he cannot conquer, he must endeavor to be pa;
tient and prudent. And thus he, who is naturally
timorous, or weak, or other'wife infirm, may have
as much, or more of the virtue of fortitude, than
the beta himself; who apprehends little, and feels
little, compared with the other, or poﬂibiy may find
pleasure in a scene of dangerous action.

If a man can prevent, or e/mpe any peril or trou-
ble, falvé' veritete, he ought to do it: orberwife
he neither considers [vim/Elf, nor them as being
what they are; them not as unneceﬂ'aty, himself
not as capable of being Inert, by them; and so dashes
against truth on the worse side 2. But where that
cannot be done, he must exert himself accordin
- to his eéiZitiet, whether great or little, and refer the
success to the Divine providence. This is the true
virtue of fortitude, which is nothing but endeavor-
ing firmly and honestly to act astruth require:; and

! Kan-vi?  xJpat7©’ Elk-70‘: isn’t Nani. “Guide the ship on
 the outﬁde of the fmoke and waves.” HOM.

therefore



Truth belonging to a Private Man, €536. 34.5

therefore is directly deducible from that notion,
on which we have founded the morality of human
3&5. . ~

It has for its objeﬂ not only adversaries, noxious
animals, and bold undertakings, but in general all
the evil; of life "; which a man must labor by pru-
dence to ward OE, and where this cannot be done
to bearwith reﬁgnation, decency, and a humble
expectation of an adjustment of all events in a fu-
turestate: the belief of which I am now going to
prove, in my manner, to be no vain nor groundless
conceit.

. V. Every one, tlmt find: himself as before in prop. I,
find: in bimﬁif at the same time a conﬁioufnefr of
bi: ' own exi/ienee and 4:75 (which is life), with a
power of apprebending, thinking, reasoning, willing,
éeginning and. ﬂopping many kinds and degree: of mo-

8 Eitil" oi urn circle: hawg’ﬁomsc, 'réiv empire» ew'rro'i'c 3‘: pagan-T
06:01:,; imﬁnp wig; unnoknwyimvr—wﬁv abuts-5 hernia-u dr-
J‘elm, inn-a) caplet: 8mm. “There are same that live retired in
“their own houses, who have their bodies reduced to mere
“ﬂ-reletons, either by walling diseases or laborious old age;
“---they, who labour for true courage, are such as exercise
“themselves in true wisdom." PH. Jun. Non in rvirz'bu: corpo-
ri: 53’ lacerti: tantummodo ﬁrtitudini: gloria  fed magi: in mir.
rate Mimi-«yum ea ﬁrtituda waealur, griando unufgui/que/Eipﬁm
'Uiﬁtif, iram (extinct, nulli: illecebri: emal/itur argue iryiestirur,
non adrvetﬂr perturéatur, nan extolliturjémndir, etc. “The true
‘ excellency of courage does not conﬁli so much in the strength
of the body and arms, as in the virtue of the mind;--—that
is truly called courage, when a man fubdues himself, keeps
under his passions, is not weakend or drawn aﬁde by any
temptations; is not depreii‘ed in adversity, nor puffed up in
‘ Profperity, £97,” St Amen.

Q

‘ a

3

6‘
C

Is

' A

tim



346 7735’ REL'IGION OfNATURE. Sec}. IX.

#07: inbz': own members, etc. b. He, who has not
these powers, has no power to dispute . this with
me: therefore I can perceive no room for any dif-
pute here, unless it be concerning the powerof be-
ginning mation. For they, who say there is always
the same quantity of motion in the World, must:
not allow therproduétion of any new 5. and then-ea
fore must suppose the animal spirits not to be put
into motion by the mind, but only being already
in motion to receive from it their directions into
these or those canals, according as it intends to
move this or that limb. But 'to this may be an-»
fwerd, that, if the mind can give these new direc-
tions and turns to the spirits, this serves my pur-
pofe as 'well, and whatI intend will follow as well
from it. And besides, it could not do this, if it
could not excite those spirits being at rest.

It is plain I can move my hand upward or down—
ward or horizontally, faster or flower or not at all, v
or ﬂop it when it is in motion, jzgﬁn: I will. Now
if my hand and those parts and spirits, by which
it is put into motion, were left to be governed by
the law of gravitation, or by any motions already
impreﬁ Upon them, the eﬁeas would be determine!
by rules of mechanism, and be necquy: thc mo;
tion or rest of my hand would not attend upon 729:
will, and be alterable upon a thought at my plan--
fare. If then I have (as I am sensible I have) a pow-
er of moving my hand in a manner, which it would
not move in by those laws, that mere bodies al-

b sz' ft s1% norz't, primary: aliguizl fenfz'et ,0 1.7450: divinum,
Ste. “He that underliands what sort of a being he himself is,
“‘ will find that he has something divine in him, €97." Cm.

ready

‘l .



Truths belohging it) a Private Man, Go. 347

ready in motion or under the force of gravitation
would observe, this motion depends solely Upon
any will, and legins there r“. _ .

VI. Tbat, which in man is tiaesubject or fuppo-
Iitum of self—conﬁioufmy}, thinks, and bar Ilse fore-
ﬁzid faculties, must be jbmelbing different from his
50a? or . carmfs. p "

For, ﬁrit, he does not I suppose find himself to
think, see, hear, 59%. all over, in any part of his
body: but the feat of cogitation and reflection he
finds in his head ‘1: and the nerves, by‘which the
knowledge of external objects is conveyd to him,
all tend to the same place. It is plainly something,
which reﬁdes sbare °,v in _.the region of the brain,
that by the mediation of these nerves governs
the body and moves the parts of it (as by so
many reins, or wires) ‘, feels What is done to it,

‘3 El [wi’lc 260.3" mn77au [vi-5 cape] oi: ire: swagger, p57: euama‘ic 03; «'3
0:79, $3on an u‘vri «Maxi: xminu, xx. “If (the body) he not moved
“by something external, as things inanimate are; or if it has
“not a natural motion, as fire has, it is manifel’c, that it must
f‘ then be moved by the soul.” GREG. THAUM.

d Which is, air eim'i'v, 07x6; in 751! au'aS'ia'wv, “as it were the
f‘ feat of sensation.” ARTEM.

‘3 'Om: aﬁaeauu‘cﬁnﬁ raj aiJ‘cgupEgo‘t' J‘opuea'gol J‘B au’eS'n'a'ac (xi; vii,
me: “only but. “Where the king is, there are his guards
“also; now the senses are the guards of the mind, and these
“are about the head." PH. JUD.

f Ta? ,uip» ft; ca’pa’l@‘ Jana: 35'", £20331” 5”“? 'yivn’lau, aeicav7@‘
damp title: «:5 Anya/49', wafﬂe. eéexn’lcu u) cuviizﬂau x4) u'vrauoo’er.
“The members of the body are not endowed with reason, but,
i‘ as soon as any appetites arise, the reason directs them as a.

“bridle. and all things are regulated, adjusted, and submit to
F‘ it.” PLUT.

fees



348 ﬂieRnnroion of NATURE. Seét.IX.

fees through the eyes, hears through the ears,
8:. g. .

Upon amputation of a limb this thing. (what-
ever it is) is not found to be diminished ‘, nor any of
its faculties lost. Its sphere of acting, while it is
confined to the body, is only contracted, and part
of its instrument lost. It cannot make use of that
which is not, or which it has not.

If the eye: be shut, or the ear: stopped, it cannot
then see, or hear: but remove the obftruétion, and
it instantly appears that the faculty, by which it apprehends the impressions made upon the organs of
sensation, remained all that while entire; and that
so it might have done, if the eyes, or cars had ne-
war been opened again; or, if the eyes had been

a No: we nuuc guide»: oculi: cemimm ea, gua' widen!“: negue
eizim eﬂ all!“jive/u: in carpore, fed-"wide gala/i gala»: fimt ad
ocular, ad dares, aa’ state: a jede animi perﬁrate. Jingle/ape aid
(agitation: acct aligaa svi maréi impediti, aperti: argue integri: 53’
ocu/i: s9’ auriém, necfvidmm, nee audimu:: at facile intelligi
peg/it, animum s5’ mia'ere, 59’ aua'ire, non ea: partes, qua qua/f
fine/free ﬁmt animi: quiéu: tamer: [entire niéil gueat meets, Iii/i
id (lg-at, s9’ aajét. “We do not now see objects with our eyes;
“for‘there is no perception in the body,---but there are par-
“ticular passages which go from the feat of the soul to the
“eyes, the ears, and the nofe. Wherefore when we are very
“thoughtful, or when we are hindered by any violent disease,
we neither see nor hear, though our eyes and ears be open
“and found; whence we may easily apprehend, that it is the
soul that fees and beats, and not those parts, which are as
it were the windows of the soul, and which it cannot make
“use of, unless it be present and attends to it." Crc.

h Or even detraﬂo cazjmre ran/to, “if a great part of the
“body were pulled of,” as Lucretius (peaks.

1 11mm; igu‘ vrzZv x6139?! meéiv an‘a'Ev Earning/firm, 6A6xug@'
eat—h» [:3 My] .uém. “Very often when the hands and legs
“are cut off, yet the soul remains entire.” Clinics.

4'

0‘

I!

C

"t

out,



Truth: belonging to a Private‘Man, (do. 349'
out, or the ears quite difabled} This shows‘ in ge-
neral, that, when any ﬂn/é or faculty seems to be
impaird or; loft by any bodily hurt, after a fever,
or through age, this does not come to pars, be-
cause it is the body that perceives and has these so-
culties in it'self; but because the body lofes its in-
ﬂrumentality, and gives that which is the .true fab-
jeﬁ. of these. faculties no opportunity of exerting
them, or of exerting them well: tho it ‘retoim them
as much as in the case before, when the eyes or
cars were ‘only 'fhut “. Thus diftinét are it a'ndits
faculties from the body and its:aﬁeétions. I will
now call it the find. . * ‘

Again, as a man perusesand'considers his own
body, does it net undeniably appear to be some-
thing different from the coIg/zdereri And when he
uses this expression my body, or the body of me, may
it not properly be demanded, who is meant by we,
or what my relates to? It cannot be the body itself:
that cannon say of itself, .it, is my body, or the boob
of me. And yet this way of speaking we naturally
fall into, from an inward and habitual sense of our-s
felves, and what we are, even tho we do notad:
vert upon it. . _ ~,

WhatI mean is this. Am‘onbeing supposed a
per/on conﬁf’ting of two parts, soul and body, the
whole person may say of this‘or that part of him,
‘ Ibo An! of me, or the body of me: but if he was ei-

k Therefore Aristotle says, if an old man had a young
man’s eye, ﬁhim‘: at" diam-op uu‘; ri@'. "an «'3 735“, 8' '79? mi! «Lax»
pwovSiva: on, a'M‘ iv  anSdmp ’0 p531“: Juli vo'a'otc, an. “He

. u would feelike a young man. So that, in old age, the, soul is
' “not affected; but is in the same Rate, as when a man is in
5 drink, or in any diﬁemper.", ‘

I

ther



.350 be RELJGION ofNATURLSeé‘tJX;

ther all/cal, or all body, and nothing eife, he could
not then speak in this manner: because'it would
be the same as to say the foul of the foul, or the
body of the body, or the I of me. The pronoun there.-
fore (in that saying my body, or the bon of me) mug:
stand for something else, to which the body be-
longs ‘; or; at leaﬂi for something, of which it is
only a part, 022. the person of the whole mm m,
And then even this. implies, that there is another
part of him, which is not body. ‘ , .
It is plain there are two dzfmzat mm: in men a;
on the one side reason, on the other paﬁinn: which,
being many times directly opposite, must' belong to
éﬁdmiﬁtbjeﬂr. , There are upon. many. occasions
eontei’ts, and as it were wars between the mind
and'the my:. so far are they. from being the ﬁamr
thing, a , t
L 1y, there is we may perceive jbmetlving with-
in us, which supports the body (keeps itup), dia-
reéts its motion for the better preservation of it,
when any hurts or evils befall] it, finds out the
means of its cure, and the like; without which it
would fall to the ground, and undergo the fate of
common matter. The body therefore must be con»
ﬁderd as being under the direﬁz'on and! tuition of

1 miracle: (with others) accounts the foul to be the true man.
Iv‘wa‘p 9TH,va «:3 vii when v67. “It is the soul that is you, and
“the body that is yours.” - '
l m So Platouses the word‘Ad'ro‘n “Self,” for the rwbale of
the‘man; by which the soul, as one part of it, is called fraud:
‘_" a poﬂbﬂion.” . ‘ h A

‘1 Qm'n'lcu c’r suit-079m} in! vri mtg? vra‘v M5701 mouxo‘t,; pdxs’rd
Ire igq‘aiﬂﬂer're: tn; MW. “It is evident, that there is something
“'else in us beside reason, which wars againit and gontradiﬁ},
if reason.” ARIST: ‘

s9mg



Tmbr'bdlmging to'a Private -Man,L Edd. 351‘
same Other thing, which is (Or should be) the go-
vemor of it, and ‘cmequenfly upon this mom
must be concluded to be deferent from it.

VII. T176 foul cannot be mere-mgtgr, or if‘it
then either elixmalter must think; or the difference
nguﬂ; arise, from the different ﬁmoa’eﬁmﬁm, [angle-2‘
tilde, ﬁgure, or magic?! f" of some Bagels of metter
respect of othere ', or a faculty of thinking must be
fageradded to; gone“systems'oﬁ. its 3W1?in 13. n9? fir-i
petadded mothers; But, '; I - ,

In the fixﬁplases. that poﬁtionzzwhich makwlé
matter to be cogitative, is contrary to all—the ap-j
preheniione  knowledge wexhave. of the new re
of it; nor cert  be tripe, unleﬂsour sensesen‘d £qu
culties be centrived only to dram/6 us. We perceive
not the least fymptpmpf regimen, orxﬁnﬁ: my!!!)
tebles, chair-s, £56., ‘

Why does the scene of thinking lie in our
and all the‘miniﬁers of sensation make their reports
to somethingﬁem if all matter be apprehenyﬁvea'
and cogitative? For in that case there would; be
as much thought‘and understanding in our beget
and every where‘else, as in our bead» .

If all matter be cogitative, then it must be so
1144:6221}: mailer, ' and thinking must; be of the ef-
fence and; definition of it: whereas by matter nq

v, Whether any; form, modification, or motion of matter can
be a human soul, seems to be ﬂinch fuchvemther qupﬂjop aet-
thatjn one of Senate’s epiﬁles, Anjzzﬂz‘tz'a, unfertituda, pruden—
tia, ceterwfue rvirtuter, ‘animalz'a ﬁm‘.‘ “, W’hether justice, or.
“fartitude, or prudence, and the red of the virtues, be living
ff ~ereatures.”. ' ~

more





3.52 We RELIGION of NA'TU'Rﬁ. Se&.IX.
more is meant but a fubltance extended and impeo’
netrablc to other matter. And since,’ for this rea-
fon, it cannot be neeeﬂ'ary for matter to think (be-
cause it may be matter without this property), it
cannot think as matter oan.

If it did, we should not only‘ continue to think
always, till the matter of which we consist is anni-
hilated, and so the assertor of this doctrine would
stumble upon immortality unawares; but we must
also have thought always in time past, ever since that
matter was in being; nor could there be any the
least intermiﬂion of aAnal winking:‘ which does
not appear to be our case.

If thinking, felﬂconsciousness, Ede; were eﬂ'm:
tial to matter, every part of it must have them:
and then no system could have them. For a system
of material parts would be a system of things con-
fcious every one 5) itﬂelf of its own existence and
individuality, and consequently thinking by itself .-
but there could be no one act of self-confcioufnei's
or thought common to the whole. Juxta-poﬁtion
in this case could signify nothing: the dii’tinétion
and individuation of the several particles would
be as much retaind in their vicinity, as if they were
separated by miles. ‘ -

In the next place, the faculties of thinking,
59%. cannot arise from the ﬁze, ﬁgure, texture, or.
motion of it: because bodies by the alteration of
these only become greater or less; round or fquare,
Es’e. rare, or denfe; translated from one place to
another with this, or that new direction, or ve-
locity; or the likei all which ideas are. quite dif-
ferent from that of thinking; there can be no rela-v

(ion.

'il’tutbs belonging to a Private Man, (it.; 53

‘tion between them 1’. These modifications and af-
fections of matter are so far from being principles
or causes of thinking and aﬁing, that they are
theeffectlve‘s but ejﬂe‘ts, proceeding from the aéﬁon
of some other matter or thing upon it, and are
proofs of its pastivity, deadnefs, and utter incapaa'
'city of becoming eogitotive. This is evident to
sense.

They, who place the eﬂ'ence of the soul in a cera‘
tain motion given to some matter (if any such men
there really be) fhbuld conﬁd‘er, among many
ether things, that to move the body fpontane'oufly '
is one of the faculties of the soul ‘1; and that this,
which is the same with the power of beginning mo-
tion, cannot come from motion already oegun, and
imprel’t ab extra. ‘ -

Let the materialilt examine well, whether he
does not feel something within himself, that aﬂ's
from an internal principle: whether he does not ex—
perience some liberty some power of governing
h-‘ieffectlf, and eboq/ing: Whether he does not enjoy.
a kind of invgﬂole empire, in which he commands-
his own thoughts, sends them to this or that place,

i) N031 224‘}! time yin? 03': 7ng 1: we? ain‘t"! m‘i'v ymn’oau‘ '
“No body can produce a mind, for how can understanding.
“come Out of’that which has no underllanding i” SALLUST. ‘

4 That the sbul is the principle of motion, or that which be-
gins it in us, is (tho it wants no tellimony) often said by the
ancients. Odd rip 's'vm, as} palm-a, gaggle“4400}: 17m c6 xnoii'v,
‘“Some affirm, that the soul is the chief and the ﬁrfi mover.”
A3157, '1'! 4.0113 «'6 s#930, auroch on? ca’pwra, worthwhile-av. “It
“is the soul that moves the body from within, and is a self-
“moving being.” SIMPL. ’Arxi Klﬂfl‘wh “The principle of
53 motion.” PLOTIN‘. ‘

Aa imploxs



354 TbeREchI'o'N of NATURE. Se&.IX.

employs them about this or that business ’, forms
limb and such designs and schemes: and Whether
there is any thing. like this in éare matter ’, how?
ever fashioned, o'r proportioned; which, if nothing
should protrude or communicate motion to it,
would forever remain fixed to the place where it
happens to be, an eternal monument of its own
being dead. Can such an aﬁi‘ve being as the. fan!
is ‘, the subject off: many powers, be itself nothing
but an accident ?

- When I begin to move myself, I do it for ﬂame
ﬂea/Em, and with respect' to some end, the mean: to‘
effect which I have, if there be occasion for it,-
concerted within myself: and this deth not at all
lbok like motion mereéi'material (or, in which mat-
ter is only concerned), which is all mechanical.
Who can imagine matter to be moved by dry;-
menu, or ever placed fills:ng and demwg/iratiam'
among levers and pullies P A

I r 'H «luxai meleth orient 757, Est 217: in“é'gzm, ah. “The
“soul can take a view over the whole earth, and ascend from-
“thence into heaven.” Max. TYRQ

,; What a ridiculous, argument for the materiality of’thc
soul is that in Lucretius ? Uéi propellere membra, Conripere ex

foerrno corpus, c. evidetur gearumﬁrzil ﬁerz' fine twee poﬂmic
Jamar, Nee taAnm parra fine eorfare); name ﬂiendam eﬂ Carpo-
reé' nature? animal» can/fare, animqmg; ? “For do we not see that
“the mind moves the several members, wakes the body out
‘f of ' sleep, Ur. (none of which can be done without touching

‘ it, and there can be no such thing as touching; without,
“, matter) must not we own then, that the soul and mind are
“material?” If nothing can move tire 6041, but another
body, what moves this; 9'72: boly might as well move itself
as, be moved by one that does.

t Ta'xes'ov nie' J‘uﬁ “we: ya‘p «rplxet. “The soul is very, quick,
for it runs everywhere.“THAL. a). Diog. Li W
C



Trudy: belonging to a Private Man, etc.;; 5

We not only mam ourselves upon reasons, which
we find in ourselves, but upon reasons imparted
by words or writing from others, or perhaps merely
at their deflre or bare suggestion. In which case,
again, no body fare can imagine, that the word:
spoken or written (the found in the air,_or the
strokes on the paper) can by any natural or me-
chanical qﬂcieme‘ cause the reader or hearer to move
in any determinate manner (or at all). The reason,
request, or friendly admonition, which is the true
motive, can make no imptéﬂion upon matter. It
must be some other kind of being, that appreg
bends the force and sense of. them.

Do not we see in conversation, how a pleasant
thing said makes people break out into laughter,
a rude thing- into paction, and so on? These affec-
tions cannot be the play/ital qﬂ’eﬁs of the words
prkeh: because then they would have the same
effect, whether they were understood, or not. And
this is further-demonﬁrable from hence, that tho
the word: do really'contain nothing, which is either
pleasant, or rude; or perhaps words are thought
to be spoken, which are net spoken; yet‘if they
are appreivmded' to do that, or the found to be
otherwise than ‘it was, the effect will be the [47726.
It is therefore the sense of the words, which is an
immaterial thing, that by passing through the un-
derﬂanding and causing that, which is the subject of
the intellectual faculties, to influence the body,
produces these motion: in the spirits, blood, muscles.

They, ' who can fancy, that matter may come to
live, think, and act fpontaneoufly, by being re-
duced to a certain magnitude, or having its parts‘
placed after a certain manner, or being inveﬁed

' A a 2 with

356 TbeREchron OfNATURE. SeétJX.

with such a ﬁgure, or excited by such a particular
motion: they, I say, would do well to discover to
us that degree of ﬁnenefs, that alteration in the litu-
ation of its parts, ‘ C‘i’c. at which matter may begin.
to finditself alive and cogitative -, and which is the
critical ininnte, that introduces these important
pmperties. If they cannot do this, nor have their
eye upon any particular criﬂr, it is a ﬁgn they
have no good reason for what they say. For if
they have no reason to charge this change upon
any particular degree or diﬁ'erence, one more than
another, they have no reason to charge it upon
any degree or difference at all; and then they have.
no reason, by which they can prove that such a
change is. made at all. Besides all which, since,
magnitude, ﬁgure, motion are but accident: of
matter, not matter, and only the [alliance is truly
matter -, .and since the substance of any one part of
matter does not differ from that of another, if any.
matter can be by nature cogitative, all must be so.
But this we have seen cannot. be. .; ,

So then in conclusion, if there is any such thing
as matter that thin/e5, etc. this must be, a particular
privilege granted to it: that is, a faculty of think-
ing must be. fuperadded to certain parts or, parcels
of it. Which, by the way, must infer the existence
of some Being able to confer'this faculty; who,
when the ineptnefs of matter has been well con-
ﬁderd, cannot appear to be less than omnipotent, or
God. But the truth is, matter seems not to be ca-
pable of such improvement, ‘of being made to
think. For since it is not the eﬂénce of matter,
it cannot be made to be so without making matter ,,
anotloer kind of fubﬂ'ance from what it is. Nor can it

be



Trieth belonging to a Private Man, 59"“- 357

ée made to arise from any of the modifications or ac-
cidents of matter; and in respect of what else can
any matter. be made to differ from other ‘matter ?
The accident: of matter are so far from being
made by my, power to produce cogitation, that
some even of them show it incapable of having a
faculty of thinking fuperadded. The very'di'vg'fia
win of 'it does this. For that which is made to
think must either be one part, or more parts j‘oind
together. "But we know no such thing as a part
of matter purely one (or indivisible). It may‘in-
deed have pleade the Author of nature, that there
should be atoms, whose parts are aAnaléy indifcere
pible, and which may be the principle: of other
bodies: but still they consist of parts, tho firmly
adhering together. And if the feat of» cogitation
be in more parts than one (whether they lie close
together, or are loose, or in a Rate of Anidity, it is
the same thing), how can it be avoided, but that
either there must be so many several minds, or
thinking substances, as there are part: (and then the
consequence, which has been mentioned, would re-
turn upon us again); or else, that there must: be
jomething else sUperadded forthem to center in, to
unite their acts, and 'make their- thoughts to be
one? And then what can this be, but some other
flea/lance, which is purely one ,?
- Matter by itself can never intertain aoﬂraﬂea'
and general ideas, such as many in our minds are “.
For could it reflect upon what past'ez; within itself

‘1 Diogener, tho he could see the table, and the pot, could not
by his eyes see Plato’s regmfé'm, & western“‘~‘ tablcity, or
t‘ potteity;". that is, he could not see, what it was that conﬂi-
tuted them a table or a pot.” D106. L.

Aag it



358 The RELIGION of NATUR~E.Se&.IX.

it could possibly find there nothing but  and
particular impressions; abstractions and metaphy-
ﬁcal ideas could not be printed upon it V. How
could one abﬂract from matter who is himself no-
thing Imt matter .? And then as to material images
themselves, which are usually supposed to be im-
prelt Upon the brain (or some part .of it), and
Rock the pbantaﬁ and memory, that which .peruses
the impressions and traces time (.or. any where)
must: be something diﬁ~in& from the ﬁmin, or that
upon which these impremons are made: otherwik
it must contemplate itself, and be both readerand

[zoo/e. And this other dirﬁinél: contemplating being
cannot be' merely corporeal, any more than the
body can perceive and think without a soul. F or
such _a corporeal being .tnul’t require fen/2', and fair-
able organs, to perceive and read these characters
and odiigia of things; and 'so anotbcr organized
body would be introduced, and the same quel’tions
and difficulties redoubled, concerning the soul of
that body and its faculties ".

- If my soul was mere matter, external v'ﬂible oh-
jeéts could only be perceived within me accord»
ing to the imprgﬂm: they make upon matter, and
mm otherwise. Ex. gr. the image of a calm in my
’ mind (or my idea of a cube) must; be always un-

w plan, 5; oi capo}: “the wise men” (more generally) say,
that the soul indeed perceives objects of sense .by the media-
tion of the body; but there are vona‘. “intelleé‘tual things,”
which it cloth “3' am: a’rﬁum'icS’aIs “meditate upon by it.
self.” Id.

" Such a foul mnﬂ be indeed as Greg. Tbaum. has it, as”...
3p4uxov. "As-mar Ji «Luxiic «Luva Aiym, “an animated body.
.“For it is absurd to speak of the soul of a soul.”

der



Y'ath belonging to a Private Man, Be. 359

der some’ particular prefpeﬂ, and conform to the
rules of permam; nor could I otherwise represent
it to myself: whereas now .I can form an idea of
it as it is in itself, and almost view all its bedne at
once, as it were incompassing it with my mind.

I can within myself correfl the external appear-
ances and iinptellions of objects; and advance, up-
on the reports and hints received by my senses, to
form ideas of things that are not extant in matter.
By seeing a material circle I may learn to form the
idea of a circle, or ﬁgure generated by the revolué
"tion of a ray about its center: but then recolleﬁing
what 'I know of matter upon other occasions, I can
conclude there is no excess material circle. So that
I have an idea, which perhaps was raiﬁed from the
hints I received from without, but is not truly to‘
be found there. If I see a tower at a great distance,
which according to the impressions made upon my
material organs seems little and round, I do not
therefore conclude it to be either: there is some-
thing within, that reasons upon the circumstances
' of the appearance, and as it were commands my
sense, and correéts the impression: and this must
be something superior to matter, since a' material
jeul is no otherwise impreﬁible itself, but as mate—‘-
rial organs are. Inl’tances of this kind are endl‘efs.
(*v. p. 92, 93.) ' .

If we know any thing of matter, we know, that
by itself it is a lifelefs thing, inert, and paHive on-
” ly; and acts necessarily (or rather is afted) accord-
ing to—the laws of motion and gravitation. This
paliivenel's seems to be (ﬂannel to it. And if we
know any thing of curfelves, we know, that we
are conscious of our own existence and acts (i.e.‘

A a 4. that

360 TbeREuGron ofNA'l‘UREI MAX;

that we live); that we have a degree of ' freedom;
that we can move ourselves jpontaneou/ly; and in
Anort, that we can, in many instances, take off the
effect of gravitation, and imprefs new motions up-
on our spirits (or give them. new dire&ions), only
by a t‘bought. Therefore to make mere matter do
all this is to change the nature of it s to change
death into life, incapacity of thinking into c0gita_
tivity, necessity into liberty. And to say, that God
may ﬁtperadd a faculty of thinking, moving itself,
és’e. to matter, if by this be meant, that he may.
make matter to be the suppositum of these faculties
(that substance, in which they inhere), is the same
in effect as to say, that God may fuperadd a faculty
of thinking to imagitativity, of acting freely to ne-
aﬁty, and so on. What sense is there in this? And
yet so it must be, while matter continues to be
matter.

That faculty of thinking, so much talked of by
some as fuperadded to certain ﬂﬁem: of matter,
fitly disposed, by virtue of God’s omnipotence,
tho it be so called, must; in reality amount to the
same thing as another fab/tame with the faculty of ‘
thinking. Fora faculty of thinking alone. will not
make up the idea of a human faul, which is endowed ‘
with mamfaeultz'er; apprehending, reflecting, com-
paring, judging, making dedué‘tions and reasone
ing, willing, putting the body in motion, continu-.
ing the animal functions by its prefence, and giv-
ing life; and therefore, whate-per it is that is saper-
added, it must be fametbz'ng which is endowed With
all those Other faculties. And whether that can be
a faculty of thinking, and so these other faculties

’ be

Truth: belonging to a Private Man, (9’0; 36 r

be only faculties of a farulty 7", or whether they
must not all be rather the faculties of some jab,
ﬂange 2, which, being (by their own conceﬂion)
fuperada'ed to matter, must be diﬂerent from it, I
do leave the unprejudiced to determine. "

If men would but seriously look into themselves,
I am persuaded the soul would not appear to them"
as a faculty of the body, or kind of appurtenant-e
to it; but rather as some fab/tame, properly placed
in it, not only to use it as an instrument, and act
by it, but also to govern it (or the parts of it; as
the tongue, hands, feet, 8c.) according to its own
reason. For I think it is plain enough, that the
mind, tho it acts under great limitations, does'
however in many instances govern the body droi-
trarily:‘ and it is monl’trous to suppose this gover-
nor to be nothing but some fit difpoﬂtion or am}
dent (fuperadded) of that matter which is governed,
A [hip it is true would not be fit for navigation, if
it was not built and provided in a proper manner:

Y This is worse than +9203 40x17““the soul of a soul,” in
Max. ﬁr. and the place just before cited. The author of the
Eﬂay cont. Hum. Underﬂ. has himself explodedit, or what is
very like it. To aﬂ, says he, qubet/Jer t1): will barﬁ-udom, i;
to aﬂ', cwlaetber one power but another power, our ability anoth
ability; 4 gaeﬂz'ofz at  sight too grq/Zy tab/Em! to make a
pure, or need an arr/war. For who is it float/oer not, rlmt power:
hing only to agents, and aroattribute: only offuoﬂancer, and riot .
ofpower: there/aloe: .? There is, if my memory does not (1;.
ceive me, another past‘age some where in the same book as
much (or more) to my purpose: but at present I cannot find
it.

1 If the sbul is only an accident (or attribute) of the 604',
how comes this accident to have (or be the support of) other
accidents, contrary ones too? As when we say, n03” £09.]
s151 “530 W931: “a wife soul, or a foolifhsoul.” S. HAsMun,

but



362 521211th I-ON:Qf Natty-XE. SeﬂJX.

but then, when it has its proper form, and is be;
come afar/1m of materials fitly difpoﬁd, it is” not
this dzfpajitian that governs it. It is them, that
other fubzﬂzancc, who ﬁts at the helm, and they,
who manage the-fails and tackle, that do this. So
arr 129%]: without a proper organization and con-
formity of parts would not be capable of being _
acted as they are; .but still it isnot the ihape, or
modification, or any other accident, that can go-
vernthem. The capacity of being governed or used
can never be the governor, applying and using ‘ that
capacity. No there must be at the helm famething
déﬂinﬂ, that commands the body, and without-
which it would run adrift, or rather link.

For the foregoing reasons it seems to me, that
matter cannot think, cannot 53 maderto think. «But
if a faculty of thinking can be:fugeradded to a syr—
temof matter, without uniting an-immaterial fab-
ﬁance to it 5-, ‘I say, if this can-5e, yeta batman body
is net such a fyﬂcm, being plainly void of thought,
, andnrganized in such a manner as to transmit the
impressions of sensible objects up to the brain,
where the percz'p’ient', and that which rqﬂeﬂs upon
them, certainly reﬁdes: and therefore that, which
fbere apprehends, thinks, and wills, must be that
ﬂﬂem 0f matter to which a faculty of thinking is
fuperadded. All the premiﬁesthen .well considered,
 I beseech you, whether instead of saying,

\ Q

- 1‘ 'E‘rtey ch} s7611 xep’furov m to xgii'nu- “For that which uses,
“and that which is used, are two difi'crent things.” PLATO.

5 Or,  to a tbz'néz'ng/ulﬂame can 6eﬁzperaa'ded tl’e #:0493965:-
15072 of ﬁliditj. Which way of speaking tho I do not rememJ
berto have met with it any where, nOr does it seem to differ .
much from the other, yet would pleafc the better. ‘

 ,.-*t.,._ that



' Truths belonging to a Private Man, Ede. 363
that this inhabitant of our heads (the foal) is a fyL
tem of matter, .to which a faculty of thinking is
soperadded, ‘it might not be me reasonable to
say, it is a thinking Mﬂaaee intimately united ,to
[owe fine material vebz'ele, wloieb bar it: rMa’enee .z'a
tloe oraia. Tho I understand not perfectly the
manner, how a cogita‘ti‘ve and [mane] substance
can be thus closely united to lush a material ve-
hide; yet I can underﬂzand‘this union as well, as
how it can be united to the body in general (per.-
haps, as how the partielesof the body itself cohere
together), and muchbetter than how 'a thinking
faculty can be fuperadded to-matter: and beside,
several phenomena may more easilyt be solved by
this bypotbests; which (tho 1 shell net pertinaci-
oufly maintain it) in meet is this. Viz. that the
human foal is a wgitatz'rzeyfubzl’cance, clothed in
a material vehicle, or rather united to it, and as it
were infeparaob' mixed (I had almost said incorpo-
rated) with it -°: that'these act in eooy'unilion, .that,
which 330615 the one, aEe&ing the other: that
the foal is detaind in the body (the head or brain)
by some Mpatby or attraﬂioa between this mate-
rial vehicle and it, till the habitation is fpoild, and
this mutual tendency interrupted '(and perhaps
turned into an averﬁon, that makes it fly 93‘), by
some hurt, or dileafe, or:by the decays and ruins

c It is worth our eoryz'deration, «wlvetber ae‘Zz'we power 5: not
the proper attribute of/pirit, aadpaﬁwe power of matter. Heme
may 6e eorgjee‘iared, that created ﬂint: are not totally ﬂpamte
ﬂoat matter, 6eeaaﬂ: t/Jey are lot/7 ae‘lz'cve and pa/i‘ve. Pure D/pip

7 rit, viz. God, is oaly aetiwe; ’pure matter 1': only paﬁve; t/Jqﬁ:
Beingr, that are aotb aﬂz’we andpaﬁwe, «we mayjadge to partake
of bot-l2. Hum. Under-ft;

or

364 The RELIGION 0f.NATURB. SeétJX.

of old age, or the like, happening to the body:
and that in the interim by means of this vehicle
motions and impressions are communicated to and
fro. But of this perhaps something more by and
by.

VIII. The soul of man fulfill: after the diﬂolation
of bit body: or, is immortal. For,

1. If it is immaterial, it is indifccrpiolc, and there-
fore incapable of being dissolved or demolished, as
bodies are ‘. Such a being can only perish by an-
nihilation: that is, it will continue to subsist and
live, if some other being, able to do this, does not
by a particular act annihilate it. And if there is any
reason to believe, that at the death of every man
there is always, such a particular annihilation, let
him that knows it produce it. Certainly to reduce
any substance into nothing requires just the same
power as to convert nothing into something: and I
fancy they, who deny the immortality of the soul,
will be cautious how they admit any such power.

2. If the soul could be material; that is, if there
could be any matter, that might be the subject of
those faculties of thinking, willing, Es’c. yet l’till,
since we cannot but be sensible, that all these are
faculties of the [elf-same thing; and that all the fe-
‘ Vera] acts of the mind are acts of the jam Aching,
each of them individual and truly one: I say, since

d This is Socram’s argument in Plato. The soul is altoge-
ther d’tdKWQ: “indillolvible,” and therefore oivdM3p©‘, “can-
-“not be dellroyd.” Which Cicero interprets thus: no: dz].
carpi, ncc diﬂrabi fora/I; nec inter-ire igitur, “it can neither be
1“divided nor separated into parts, and consequently cannot
9‘ be destroyed.”.

it

Trait/:2: Zaelonging to a Private Man, s5%. 365

it is so, this matter must be so perfectly united in
itself, so absolutely one, as no matter knowable by
us can be. .And then the [raft that can be allowed
is that it should be truly solid, and not aﬂnaliy di-
viﬂble; that is, such as no natural gran/é could
destroy. ‘

To introduce matter with a faculty of thinking,
or a flanking matter, is to introduce matter with a;
new and Oppolite property; and that is to intro-
duce a new jperie: of matter °, which will differ as
eﬂ'entially from therother common unthinking kind,
as any species whatsoever does from its oppolite in
[rain pmdicamentali, even as éody does from jﬁritr
F or thinking and unthinking diEer as corporeal
and incorporeal. And if so, this thinking matter:
must: always continue to think, till either it is an-
nihilated, or there is a transmntation of one species
into another: and to take refuge in either of these
expectations is at least to expect omnipotence,
should interpose to help out a bad cause.

If any one should say, that God might by, vir-
tue of his omnipotence superadd to certain parcels,
of matter a fourth dimension, I ﬂ‘lOUld not perhaps-
dispute the Divine power: but I might say, that
such matter, exif’ring under four dimensions,

'3 Lucretia: scents to be aware of this. yam triplex animi 4?
nature reperta: Nee tamer: be: fat/2m! aa’ fin/um canﬂa crean-
dam, (3’6. Qatarta quay; his igitur quandam natura nccqﬂi’ s/1 At-
tribaatur: ea eﬂ amino nominis expers. “The soul is found ‘
“to be made up of three parts, nor are all these sufficient to
' “produce understanding, 6:. It is neceil'ary therefore that
“ﬂan: otlvcr pantzjcularﬁnrtb nature should be added to these:
“and this «we 752w no name at all ford? .

would



would (ﬁentialfirsthr‘from that, which cannot exist
tinder four, or which: can exist but only under
three; and thati this four-dimenﬁond matter mustf
4M0: remainlilaeh, because‘ no substance can be
changed into or become another, essentially diffe-
rent, nor do we know of any, that by the court?!
of nature ceases- totally to be, or is reduced to no‘
thine": .
3. The next argument shall proceed- by-way of
'e'ﬂion and anﬁver.‘ Because a removal of the
principal objection against any thing is a good ar-
gument for it. Obj. It items as if thinking was not
essential to the soul, but rather a capacity of think
ing under certain circumstances. For it does not
think, when it lies concealed in the primitive rudi-
ment of the man, in the womb, bperhapsin the be-
ginnings of infancy, in Heep, in a swoon: and the
leafon of this seems to lie in the circumstances of the
body, which either is net sufficiently attended, and
prepared; or for a while implorys the ﬁairits wholly
in the digeﬂion of its aliment, and other offices in
the animal oeeonemy -, or by some external attack,
or the working of some enemy got into it, has its
parts difordered, and thepaﬁ'ages so pofi’eﬁ, that the
blood. land other fluids can scarce break through; ‘
or after some such manner is preternaturally aﬂ'eé‘t-
ed. .And- therefore 'the‘question' to be resolved is
not, whether the fool is material or immatm’al;
and much less, whether it will be annibildtzd at
death“; bgt, whether that fouI (be it what it will),
which ceases to think, when the body is notfitly dif-
poﬂd, can think at all, when the body is quite d1]:-
faleed, and leaves the soul no opportunity of actu-
atxng

Truths belonging to a Private Man, (Be. 367
atng it any more, or operating by it ’.  If this
objection cannot be fully answered, till we know:
more of the nature of beings, and of chad
wimulum, by which the ﬁmland body are comm
than we do at present, it must not therefore Be
looked Upon as certainly unanﬁeeram in itself; and
much less, if only it cannot be answered by me. It
may perhaps be possible to turn it even into an arid:
gumentfor the immortality of tie/Bu]. 1

The foul it camtot be deniediisla limited being;
or a being, which alchemist limitations: thefelimp
tations at diﬂ'erertt times are déﬁh‘em, its atE‘tiIvri't-yf
and faculties being more obﬁrué‘ted enclogd all
one time than another, and most of all in Heep, or‘
a dclz'Quium: as these‘ obﬁtuétions are removed; it“
acts more clearly and freebie and therefore if the
Rate of the foul in the body (its confinement
there) may be considered as. one general and gran».
limitation, why, when this limitation shall be taken:
off (this great obﬂtuétion removed), may it ‘ not
be .allowed to aé‘t with: skill greater freedom anda‘
clearness; the great'eﬂ-it is capable of .F Whilﬁ‘j
remains in the brain, item as it'were look out at
a few aperture:; that is, receive the notices at
many things by theft nerves and‘organs, whith‘

‘ If Luca: by ﬂan/it: “ferric,” means all manner of awn.-
henﬁon and knowledge, there is no room for that disjunhion:
Aut nibz'l elf fen/31: mind: 13 mrte reliAnm, Aut mar: ip/h'nibil.
“1 Either there remains no sense at all in the soul after death,-
“or death itself is nothing? For if the former part, being
the other will follow. _4

i z Vela! é dz'utz'na carter: emf/2;: [animus]. “(The lbul)
“as it were let out of a prison, in which it has been a long
5" while." SEN. v ‘ . ._ ..

t

are

368 ﬁzzRELIoION ofNA'rURE. IX}

are the instruments of fonfation: but if any of those
avenues to it be ﬂopt, that branch of its know-m
ledge is for a time cut off. If those tracks in the
brain, or those mar/e5, whatever they are, and
where ever they are imprinted, upon which our
may and image: of things seem to depend, are
filled up or overcaii by any vapor, or otherwise
darkend, it can read them no more, till the cloud.
is dispersed. (For it Cannot read what is not legiole,
and indeed for the present not there.) And since
even in ao/t’taﬂed rqﬂoxiom the mind is obliged to-
make use of:wordr ", or some kind of signs, to fix
its ideas, and to render them tractable and liable.
enough to be perused, compared, etc. and this kind
of language depends upon memory; while this is
intermitted, the use of the other is taken away,
with all that depends upon it. This is the prefix:
ﬂat: of the foul: and from hence the reason' ap-
pears in some meaﬁire, why we do not think in
found sleep, 8cc. but it does not follow from hence,
that the foul cannot subsist. and act under more in-
larged circumstances. T hat, which, being confined-
to the body, and able to act only according to the.
opportunities this affords, can now perceive visiblet
objects only with two eyes (at two windows ‘),-
because there are no more, might doubtlefs ice
with four, if there were so many properly placed.

1* Those kinds of animals, which do not/ﬂak, do not rea—_
fan .' but those, which do the one, do the other. Therefore,
.1378 in, “a living ” (or Arab. i315le “a speaking ani.
“ml”) is a rational animal: and Ao’yQ‘ signifies both fpeecb‘
and rug/on, as going together. ' ,

1 60513:: ya‘p 3mm- rrﬁc 40x57; au' au’oSn'om. f‘ The senses are
3‘ the windows of the s011133 Bas. .

and



’ "3 faith: belonging’tb‘ja PriVate' Man, 69?. 369‘
and disposed; or if its habitation were all eje (win- ‘
dow all round), might feeall round. - And ~so, in
general, that, which now can know many things
by the impressions made at the ends of the nerves,
or by the intervention 'of'our present Organs, and
in this ﬂtz'mtion and indoﬁlre ban knew-them no
other way, may for all that, when. it comes to be
loafer! out of that prison k, know them immediately;
or «by‘some other .mdim. That, which is now’
forced to make shift with words and ﬂgm of things-
in its reasonings, may, when it shall‘be set‘at liberty
and; can come at them, reason upon the intuition?
of things themﬁeltzes, or use a language more ﬂirt?-
turd! Or'z'déal. Ifay, it is not impoﬂzéie, that this
shou'ld be the case; and‘therefore no onetcan’ say,
with“ieafon, that it isnot:‘ especially, since we
find by experience, that the foul islimited; that.
the limitations are variable; that-we know not
enough of the nature of spirit to determine, howi
these'limitations arer- éﬁ‘eéted i and therefore can;
°not tell, how far‘they'inay be carried on, or taken“
01?. ‘ This fuﬁieeis to-ren’zove the force of the objecu.
tibn. But further, “'  i "

i ' A man, when lie-wakes, or comes'to'bz'effectlf ( which
phral'e implies what I am going to 'say), immedi-‘
ately knows this, and knows himself to be the
jinn: foul that he was before his sleep, 'or fainting
away. I willsuppose, that he is also conscious to-
himself, that in those intervals he thought not at
all (which is the same the objeé‘cor- must supposefr

1‘ 'Aa-‘apxg' as!) Jed/aa’la‘ iv  ‘1'; oaﬂdc 3am. J‘mpspw’xaa.‘
‘1 When it [hall dwell upon the Rage of the universe, without
_‘_‘ ﬂefh and without a body.” PH. Jun.:

.. B b sbut



370 127: RE LIGIOH'Of NATURE, Soft. IX.
that is, if his body had been cut to pieces, or moul-

derd to dul’t, he could not have thoughtrlej}: for:

there is no thinking less‘ than thinking not at all.
From hence then I gather, that the-sfoul pug/hm:
a capacity 0f  Behind? those cit-cum-
ﬁances and indispositions of the body, in which it
thinks no more, than if the bodywas def/iron; and
that therefore it may, and will preserve it,- when
the body is ‘del’troyd. And if so, what can this rd-
pzzcz'ty be preserved for? Certainly not, that -it may
never be exerted. The Author, of nature does nor.
life to act after timt manner. 80 that here isthis
dilemma to be opposed to the objection. In sleep
and swoonings the foul does either wink, ‘or not.
If it does, the objection has no foundation: and if
it dotb not, then all thatmwill follow, which I have
just now said. '

- If we should suppose the foulto be a being by,

nature made to inform some beefy, and that it can-

not exist: and aél; in a [late of 10va fepamtion; from:
all body; it would not follow; from hence, that:

what we call death, must' therefore reduCe it to’a

state of absolute insenseéilz'zy and rinauflfz'vity, which,

to it would be equal to non-exgﬁence. For that body,
which is so necessary to it, may be‘some fine vehicle,
that dwells with it in the brain (according to that
motive/i: p. 361.) and goes off with it at death.
Neither the answers to the objection, nor the case
after death will be much altered by such a fuppo/i-
tr'on. And since Iconfess I see no absurdity init, I
will try to explain it a little further. We are fen-
lible of many material impressions (impressions
made upon us by material causes, or bodies): that
there are such we are sure. Therefore there must be

[me



.Yﬂttbr reelenging. to a. Private Man, 65;.; 7 t

ﬂame matter within us, which being moved or preﬂl
edupon, the foul apprehends it immediately, And
therefore, again, there must be same matter to which.
it is immdiately and intimately united, and related
in such Aa'manner, 'as it is not related to any other..
Let us now suppose this said matter to be some re-
ﬁned and spirituous 'vebiele 1', which'the foul dOth
immediately inform; withwhich it sympathizes;
by which it acts, and is acted upon; and to which
it is vitally and winﬁparably united: and that this
animated vehicle has its abode in the brain, among

1 So Hieraeler difiinguifhes '73 651063“5M5' 55F“; 594%.“
“773' 570/152. “our glorious body, and the thin vehicle of the
“so01,” from that, which he calls so‘ 'Snﬂb‘v iﬂivdﬁﬂ: “our
“mortal body,” and to ’which the former communicates life.
TE adyoad‘si'ri/uir chi/ail: age-6p!) 65y: Syn-a?! 3v. “The mortal and
“the glorious body adhere to, and grow up with each either-3"
M. This fine body he calls also 4vxmo‘v vista, “a living body,”
and mwyﬂnév Sigma. “a spiritual vehicle." In Ni/ém. that},
there is much concerning that fine (my, in which, the foul is
clothed, and from which it is never to be separated, accord-
ing to an old tradition. Memb.  gives us the (am of it in
such words as there. rman m‘mn 1: mo '13; p1 qu tm'
D5197 ﬂN‘I D3154 “There is a very thin line body, with?
.“which the fool is clothed, before it comes into the world:” and.
afterward, 1'“?pr ﬂJllUN‘Iﬂ DI‘N‘WJJ 71071 NEW)”
m‘n ininwn 392mm mum-i D‘p‘l D‘OUJJ:13;
:1an T119?“N"? NlOWJﬂl -l'“N"lﬂ wax-1'7 D‘JUJVJ
Chip can @519 mi ‘7; mumwn Uan:10an
.1300 D-nsn um: cm 109 Drama cam snub aw:
“These souls, at their first creation, were joined with some
‘1‘ thin, spiritual, and celeilial bodies, which cannot be per-
-‘ ceived by our eyes, Neither can these thin spiritual bodies.
“be separated from those souls so long as the world kills,
‘ neither before they came into this (gross) body, nor while,
“they'remain in it, nor after they are separated from it."
Saadz'a: long before him joins to the foul P1 DEL), “a thin
u fubﬂanoe 9* which he says is cr‘n‘zm In ['13 mm pm,
‘1‘ thinner than the ether in the lkics,” Es’c,

'13b; the

R

W — _.__‘L

372 Tb: RE 1.! o 1 ON of NA '1' tint.~ Soft. IX.
the heads and beginnings of the nerves. Suppofc

we also, that when any impreﬂien: are made upon '

the organs or parts .of the body, the effects of
them are carried by the nerve: up to their fountain,

and the place, where the foul in its vehicle is ', and

there they communicate their several motions (or
tremors to this material vebiele (or by their mo-
tions,'or tendency to motion, prefs upon) it; s9 that
the foul, which inhabits it in a peculiar manner,
and is thoroughly poﬂ'eﬂ: of it, shall be apprehen-
five of these motions or pressures: and moreover,
that this vebz'ele so guarded and ineompasted by the
body as it is, can be came at or moved by external
objects no other way, but by the mediation of the
nerves; nor the jbul, by consequence, have any di-
reél: intelligence concerning them, or correfpon-

dence with them, any other way. And as we fup- .

pofe the foul to receive notices of things from with-
out in this manner, so let us suppose, on the other
side, that by moving its own velaiele it may pro-
duce motion in the contigUous ﬁirz'ts and newer,
and-so move the body: I mean, when nothing ren-
ders them unﬁt to be moved. ' Let us suppose ﬁJr-
ther, that the foul by means of this vebz'ele feels or
finds those prints and portraits, or those eﬁﬂ: and
remain: left by objects on the mind in some man.
net or Other, whichcause the remembrance of words
and things: I mean again, when they are not filled
up, or obscured by any thing; or, when there are
any such to be felt. And lastly, let iussuppose, that
if the foul in its more abﬂmﬂed and purer reason-
ings, or more spiritual acts, has any occasion for
matter, to serve it, the. matter of- this rvehicle is
that which is always’with it, and serves it. All
 ' which



A

Tram; éelanging to a Private Man, €9’e. 37 3

which it is easy to understand, and perhaps not
very difficult to suppose. . On the contrary, by
many symptoms it appears most probable, that
that matter, to Which the .mind is immediately pre-
sent, and in which is its true fbekinab, is not the
whole gross body, but some fubtile body, placed (as
I have said) in the region of the brain. For there
all the conveyances of sensible [peeies conspire to
meet, and there in reflection we find ourselves:
when a limb is loﬁ, the foul, ’tis true, lofes an op-
portunity of receiving intelligence from or by it,
and of ufing it, but perceives no loss in itself: and
tho the body, many parts of it at least, are in a per-
petual Anx and continually altering, yet 1 know
that the fubftance, which thin/es within me new (or
rather, which is I), is,. notwithstanding all the
changes my body has undergone, the “very same
which thought above ﬁfty years ago, and ever
since; when I playd in such a field, went to such
a school, was of such a univeriity, performed such
and such exercises, 8e m. If you would permit
me to use a school term, 1 would say the egoity “
' remains.

1” Cz‘m cwjbom quotidie noﬂra Anent, s5’ are! ere/tan! ant de—
rreﬁemt, erga tat erimu: bominer, quot quotidie cammutamur ? aut
alias fuz', (I‘m decent mortar: gﬂm; aliw, aim triginta; alz'u:
.a‘em guiuquaginta, alias, (Fun  tote cane rafﬂe/hm ? “Be-
“cause our bodies are continually altering, and either in-
“creasong ordiminishing, shall we therefore be as many diffe-
rent men, as we undergo perpetual changes P Or was I one
“person when I was ten years old, another when I was thir-
“ty, another when I was ﬁfty, and another now I am grey-
“headed.” St JEROM. So it must be, if our souls are no—
thing different from our bodies.

, n I would say the egoity remains, that is, that by which I
am the same I was; Tall} has his Lentulita: f‘ Lentulity,” and
B b; Appieta:



'374. TbeREchron of NATURE; Se&.IX.

remains. Now to answer the objection, and apply
all this to our purpose. Why do we not perceive
external objects in our sleep, or a swoon .? Because
'the poﬂoge: are become impraé‘ticable, the windows
fhut, and the nerves, being obstructed, or form:
how rendered for the time useless, can transmit no
information to it. Why however does it not rea-
fon and think about fometbitzg or other? Because,
all the mark: by which things are remembered be-
ing for the present' choked up or difo'rderd, the re-
membrance of those objeﬂi, about which it is wont
to employ itself, and even of the word: (or other
signs), in which it uses to reason, and to preserve
the deductions and conclusions it makes, is all fuf-
pended and 101% for the time; and so its tables bee
ing coverd, its books clofed, and its tools locked
“up, the requisites for reasoning are wanting, and
no subject offers itself, to exercise its thoughts, it
having yet had little or no opportunity to take
in big/oer objeﬂ: and more reﬁned matter for con.
templation. And to conclude, if it be demanded,
why anyone should imagine, that the foul may
think, perceive, act after death, when it does not
do this in sleep, etc. the answer is; because those
izzeiofure: and impediments, which occafiond the
forementioned intermiﬁions, and those great limi-
' tations under which it labors at all times, will be
removed with its enlargement out of the body.
When it shall in its proper vehicle be let go, and
take its ﬂight into the open fields of heaven, it will
then be bare to the immediate impressions of ob-

Appieta: “Appiety;” that is, time by which Lentw’a; remain-
ed Leutulus, and Appiu: remained dppim; in the same form,
tho not jail the like sense, ‘

jcéts:_



Truth belonging to‘ a Private Man, 53°C- Q75

jeéts: and why should not those impressions, which
affected the nerves that moved and affected the ve-
hicle and foul in it, 4195222 the vehicle immediately,
' when theya-re immediately made upon it, without
the interposition of the nerves ? The band, which
feels an object at the end of a ﬂaﬁ‘, may certainly
be allowed to feel the same much better by imme-
diate cantaﬂ, without the i’tafi‘. Nay, why should
we not think, that it may admit of more objects
and the knowledge of more things, than it can
now; since being exposed all round to the influences of them, it may be moved not only by visible
objects just at the extremities of the optic nerves,
by sounds atithe ends of they auditwy, 8m. but be-
come as it were all eye to visible objects, allege: to
audible, and so on .9 And why should we not think
this the rather, because then the foul may be also
perceptive of finer impressions and ethereal contacts,
and consequently of more kinds of objects, such as
we are now incapable of knowing? And then, this
being so, why should we not prefage, that other
endowments, , as faculties of reasoning, communi-
Cating thoughts, and the like, will be propertienable
to such noble opportunities of knowledge P There
seems to be nothing in this account impaﬁéle; and
therefore nothing, but what may ee.

If we do but attend, we must: see every where,
that many things are by ways, which we do not,
nor can understand; and therefore we must be
convinced, even from hence, that more may be;
and therefore that theobjection before us, tho we
could notialve the ei'gjieultz'e: in it, and what is fup—
poled here:ﬂiduldbe—ail- rejeéted as chimerieal, yet
oughti to be no prejudice against the belief of the
~ B b 4. , immori-

'376 TbeRELicron of NATURE. Seét.IX.

immortality of the foul, if there is any (but one)
good reason for it. ‘

But if we can in any tolerable manner (which in
our present circumstances is as much, as can be
teitpeé‘ted) account for the difficulties objected, and
those the greatq/Z:be1ong°ng to, this matter, and
show how it is poﬁble that they may consist with
immortality, this will greatly cmoéorate the argu-
ments for it, if not be one its/2g)". This I hope is
done: or if I have not spoke directly tower) pm
of the objection, from .what has been done that
defect may easily be supplied.

4. We may conclude the souls of men robe im-t
mortal from the nature of God. For ifhe is (which
fore nobody doubts) a. Perfect being, He, as such,
can do nothing inconsistent with perfect or ugh:
reason. And then no facing, nor dream/lame of
any being, can come from  asits cause, which
it is not agreeable to ' such reason should be: or
(which is the same), He cannot but deal reason-
abe with all His dependents. And then again, if
we are in the number of these, and the mortality
of the human soul does not consist with reason,
we may be sure it is immortal: as sure as we can
be of any thing by the use of our faculties; and
that is, as sure as we can be of any thing. Whether
therefore that does cargﬂﬂ with reason, or not, is to
be inquired.

To produce a being into a state .of clear bappi-
rug/s in any degree, can be no injury to it; or into
a state of mixed happiness, provided the happiness

certainly overédlances the contrary, and the unhap-
py- or fquering part be not greater than what that
being would (baa/E: in order to obtain the happiness,

,. Of

hr

L.

Truth: belonging 1b a PriVate Man, Es’c. 377

or rather than lose it. Nor, again, can any wrong
be done by producing a being subject to more mi-
sery than happiness, if that being has it in his own
power to avoid the misery, or so much of it, as
may leave the remainder of misery not greater,
than what he would rather sustain than miss the.
proportion of happiness. The only case then, by
which wrong can be done in the production of any
being, is, when it is necessarily and irremediably to
be miserable, without any recompense, or balance
of that misery °: and this indeed is a case so grie-
vous, so utterly irreconcilable to all reason, that the
heart of a reasoning and considering man can
scarce bear the thought of it. So much every one
must understand of the nature of reason and justice
as to allow these things for truths incontestable.
Now then he, who says the soul of man is mor-
tal, must say one of these two things: either that
God is an unreasonable, unjust, cruel Being; or
that no man in respect of this life (which accord-
ing to him is all), has a greater share of misery,
unavoidable, than of happiness. To say the former
is to contradict that, which I presume has been
proved beyond contradiction. To which I may
add here, that this is to avow such an unworthy, im-

° That past’age in <i>Sefer ha-Ikkarim</i>. imports much the same thing,
that has been said here: 3W.) mmmow '13'13'1UJ 1ND}: N17?
3101 NEON) ‘lN‘l I‘N 9‘1 inm‘snw 7317“bigotry “N‘.
anun mm 1119:“! DR 9‘07“2111571 In 31‘90 inlN‘EOlD
NEON) “NW I‘N 'DUT'I N171 9'!” DNW NSDWJ “NW.
“This is manifest, that that thing, whose existence is good,
“ought to exist:;' and that thing,whose existence is evil, ought
“not to exist; and if the existence of any thing is made up of
6‘ amixture of good and evil, if the good prevail, it ought to
“exist‘; and. if the. evil prevail. it. ought not to existz.”

pious


pious notion of the Supreme being, as one would
not entertain without Caution even of the wad} of
men; 'such'a one, as even theperson himself, who
says this, must know to be few. For he cannot
but see, and must own many instances of the rea-
fqnablemfs and beneﬁceme of the Deity: not one of
which could be, if cruelty and unreasonableness
were His inclination; since He has power'to exe-
cute His own inclinations tborougbly, and ‘is a Be-
ing uniform in his nature. Then to say the latter
is to contradict the whole [2073' of mankind, and
even 0116’: awn [en/2:5. Conﬁder well the dreadful
eﬂ’eé‘ts of many wars, and all those barbarous de-
folations, which we read of: what cruel tyrant:
there are, and have been in the world, who (at
least in their ﬁts) divert theeffectlm: with the pangs
and, convulﬁons of their fellow-creatures P: what
ﬂaer is, ‘1, and bow men have been brought into
. A N that

l P C. qujhr-Senarore: C‘f Egm'ter—reridit, tolﬁt, non gag/71'-
_orzir, fed animi caufa. Deimle gee/dam ex illis—ad lacernam de-
collaéah—Tor/E’mt per omnia, gut: in rerun: natura tfg'ﬂzﬁma
ﬁmt, ﬁdz'az/is, etc. “C, Cdfdf-thﬂ Senators and the Knights—
“killed and put to the rack (a great many) not in order to
.“find out the truth, but for. t/m'r ovum pleasure an'ly. After-
“wards he cut off the heads of some—by candle-light_.
“tormented others, by all the most cruel tortures that could
“be thought of in nature; firetched them with cords, (3%."
SEN. Homo, ﬂzcra r35, jam per lufum 59’ jocum accidz'htr. “A
“man, who is a divine creature, is slain out ofﬂmrt and jqﬂ.”
Id.

‘1 Slaves were reckoned among beasts of old. 06"" 743:) Mm} ari-
yuuar. ofﬁr‘ e’v aircrech 60’)" J. “F oryou are not really a woman,
“nor are you to be reckoned of human race." EURIP. And
sometimes as mere instruments and tools. '0 789 NM: (#40356!
;,o;.yo.‘-’¢ar'apy¢ny “mariner. “For a slave is a living inﬁru-
' - a . “ment:





Tritth belonging to a Private Man, 8:. 379

that lamentable Rate: how many have been ruined
by accident: unforeseen: how many have suffered or
been undone by my'uﬂ laws, judges, witnesses,
sit ’. how many have brought incurable diﬁaﬁ’s,
or the tau/é: of them, and of great torments, into
the world with them: how many more, such bo-
dily infirmities and disadvantages, as have rendered

“ment: and an instrument is alifelefs slave,” Aars'r. Their
sad condition I will set down in Plato’s words. 09': aide}: «it;
y’ici 'ro‘ wa'S'n/aat, 'ro‘ «Hattie-81a JAM? infant“: fruit,  xgt'i'tr’lov tw-
S'vulnu 39» ii 4'5" 39:: dial/agree, 'xgu‘ opomaauﬂpnac. (43 0759'!
is)! who‘s who} poem, .uml‘i JAM.» a? air “Mafia. “Tobe injured
“is not the fuffering of a man but of a Have, to whom death is
“better than life: who, if he be unjustly treated and abused,
“is wholly unable to help himself, and no body clfe has any
“concern for him."

' Those Jﬁﬁn-‘ralujims'ol J‘ueuxlu. “unspeakable and inereq
“dible calamities,” which the 'nAEmb “collectors of the
“taxes,” had brought upon the cities of Aﬁa, are too many
to be transcribed: but some account of them is to be seen in
Plat. «v.Luc. which may serve for one instance out of thou-
sands. It may be reckoned madness indeed, maxima: tm‘rt‘uter,
guaﬁ grarvg'ﬂma ddiéZa, pwzire, “to punish the greatest vir.
tues, as if they were the greatest crimes;” as Val. M. says,
speaking of Pbocion's case: but such madness has been very
common, and men have suffered even for their virtue. Grim:
cruelly put to death, cham/brorem-u, Ufatraum cum centum
(Imp/i1}: ﬁ/ii: at nepotibm—-—, nulla injuria lacqstirur, fed quid in
bi: maximam apad Per/as probitatis s9’ fortitudini: laudem (on-
ﬁﬂere raidebat, “his filler orba---, and his uncle with a hundred
of his sons and grandsons-——,without being provoked by any
f‘ injury, but only because he saw that they were in great re-
putation amongst the Perﬂam for prabz‘ty and valour.” Id.
And Seneca having recommended the example of Gram::72:-
liu: (juliu: Grecinur, in Tacit. the father of 714521: flgrico/a),
adds, gum: C. Cat/qr occidit 05 bar 1011071, quid meliar wir amt,
9min: eﬂé gumng syr-arm!) expea'z'ret, “whom C. C¢far killed
‘.‘ for this reason only, because he was a better man, than it
“was expedient for a tyrant that any man should be.”

their



330 The RELIGION of NATURE. Se&.IX.

their whole liver uneasy: how many are born to no
Other inheritance but invincible poverty and trou-
ble 9 Initances are endless: bur, for a little tqﬂe of
the condition of mankind here, reflect upon that
story related by Street) (from Poiybiur) and P11:-
mreb, where, even by order of the. Roman senate,
P. ﬁmyliur, one of the best of them too, at one
prefixed hour sacked and destroyed seventy cities, un-
awares, and drove fifteen myriad: of innocent per—
sons into captivity; to be sold, only to raise pay
for the merciless soldiers and their own executio-
ners. Peruse that account of the gold-works in the
confines of Egypt given by Diodorus: and think
over the circumstances of the unfortunate laborers
there, who were not only criminals, or men taken
in war, but even such as mlumny, or unju/i power
had doomd (perhaps for being too good) to that
place of torment; many times with all their rela-
tions and poor children ‘. Or, once for all, take a
view of fireitude, as it is described by Pignoriur.
To pass over the Sicilian tyrants, him of Pb€7£,
ﬂpoZ/odoru: ‘, and the like, of which hiﬂzory sup-

' s 05 «34‘er JmCoAa'ie urgwtaér’lu, agu‘ J‘ui Supo‘r air anemic act-
giclayirot, an} (air mic-oi, were 33 a) [uni aria-ac ouyﬁvdar.
“Some fell either by false accusations, or they were arbitrarily
delivered up to prison, sometimes themselves only, and
sometimes all their relations with them.”

t Mentiond by Cicero with Plaalarir. He was tyrant of Caf-
fanrlrz'a, and is represented (out of Poiymmr) as 90ﬂxﬂ'ﬂ'd‘79':m‘
dp67a7©' odﬂm, Scot aap‘"EAva ii cued BagCJgu hygiene”,
“as the bloodieﬁ and most cruel of all the tyrants that ever
“reigned in Greece, or amongst the Barbarians.” Yet Elia):
says, 'Exrr'i airs 6w¢ra¢kry6pn©’ 13" tieffectmra'pu@', iyin’lo genui-
vgseyc, xA. “That, when he, was heated and instanced with wine,
S‘- thcn he was still more bloody.”

plies



Truth: belonging to a Private Man, etc. 38 r

p’lies plenty; consider those terrible ‘profcriptions
among the Kmart: “, with. the reigns of most of
their .mperorr, more bloody than Lyér'c lion, or
Abtrcanian tiger, even some 0f the Cbriﬂian empe-
rors not excepted. Read the direful and unjust ex-
ecutions reported by Amm. Marcellinur: among
hundreds of others that of Eafebéus w. Every whif-
per in those times or [2317! ﬁzfpz’cion brought upon
men the question and tortures inconceivable, Men’s
very dreams were once interpreted to be treason;
and they durllzscarce'own, that they had ever ﬂept x.
. What inhuma‘n punishments iwere used among the
Perﬂanr ’, in an arbitrary manner too; and many
times extended to whole families, and all the kin-
dred, tho not concerned 1“P But instead of enumerat-
ing here burnings, crucifixions, breakings upon the
wheel, impalings, exacpmrair, etc. I choose to refer

" It is f aid of Sylla's peace, after Marz'm’s party were broken,
Pax cum belle d: crude/irate certwvz't, s9’ with, “That the
“peace rivalled the war in cruelty, and overcame it.“St
‘Aus'r. . ‘ a

W 5210' ita emf/remix“, at cruciatidu: mméra detﬂnf, imply;
ram calojustitiam, torrw‘mz renidem fundato peﬂore mag/it immo.
5:753, etc. -“Whofe bowels were torn out in such a manner,
“thatthcy wanted members totorment; hecalled uponheaven
“for justice, and looking ﬁemly with a calm countenance,
“he continued unmoved by his firm resolution, €9’c.” In the
reign of Cart/lurztiur.

1‘ Marebant’gue dot}; Quinlan, 911321 apud Atlanta: natz' mm
Jan, #55 memoranrur ﬁmm’a no): rviderz'. “some learned men
“were very forry that they were not born amongst: the Atlan-
ter, of whom it is reported that they never dream.”

Y V. Plat. ii: to. Artax. .

z 05 noxam‘ zmz'ur omm': peeping-did: per-it. “All the whole
“‘ nei hbourhdod perished f6r~the fault of one single person."

7AM Mame; . “:1
' you



382 The RELIGION of NATURE. Se&.IX.

you to those authors, who have designedly treated
of the torment: and one/lion: of the ancients. Look
into the history of the Christian Church, and her
martyrologies: examin the prisons' of the inqzaﬁ-.
tion, the groom of which those walls are conscious,
and uponwhat ﬂight occasions men are racked and
tortured by the tormentors there: and, to finish
this detail (hideous indeed, but too true) as fall: as
I can, consider the many maﬂ‘acres, perfecutions,
and miseries consequent upon them, which falﬁ
religion has caused, authorized, fanéliﬁed. Indeed
the 1472on of mankind is little else but, the history of
uncomfortable, dreadful passages: and a great part
of it, however things are palliated and gilded over,
is scarcer to be red by a good-natured man with-
out amazement, horror, tears. One can scarce look
into a news-paper, or out at his window, but hard—
Ihips and querings present themselves, in one
Ihape or other. Now among all tboﬁe millions, who
have fuﬂ’erd eminently, can it be imagined, that
there have not been multitudes, whose griefs and
- pangs have far outweigbd all their enjoyments;'
and yet who have not been able, either by their
innocence, their prudence, or any power in them,
to escape that litter drought, which they have
drunk? And then, howcan we acquit the justice'
and reasonaolenejft of that Being, upon whom these
poor creatures depend, and who leaves them such'
great lofers by their existence, if there be no fu-
turestate, where the proper amends may be made 9
So that the argument is brought to this undenii
able iITue;. .if the foul of man is not immortal, ei-
‘ther there is‘ no God, upon whom we depend; or
He is an unreofonoole Being; or there never has been

an

Trgtluhmz'ng to a PrivateMan, (9’6. 38 3*.

any man, whole fuﬁkrings in this world have ex-
ceeded his injoym'ents, wlithout his being the cause
ofit himself.; Bot furely no one of these three things
can be. said. Ergo“‘ ‘ .
That, which saggravates the- bard taﬁ of the
poorfuﬁ'qerszmentioned above, if. there be no fu-
ture ﬂan, in which their paf’t sufferings may’ be '
brought into 'the account, and -iecompenfed,- is;
that: .many times- their ' per/lemurs:and 'tormentars.
pass . their lives in plenty and grandeur: that is,“
the innocent have not.- only' the portion, that pro:
perl-yrbeloings “to the criminal and tunreasonabl‘e'
part of mankind, but the guilty have that, which
belongsrrather*toéthe'innocent' 2 Such a tran/ﬁa- _
ﬂtioig of reﬂvards andpuniﬂiments, ending in itself,
Without any respect to something which is to follow
hereafter; can never; consist with the'nature of a Go-
vernor, .Who “is: nor very much below rational: a
thought, which Godforbid any one should dare to‘
admit of Him. To suppose the virtuous and wife'
left ultimately but in the same state withthe unjust
and proﬁigate is to suppose such a constirutz'on of
nature, as never can ﬂow from a principle of rea-
fon‘,ra.God of truth andcequz'ty: and therefore such
a consisturion, as leaves the former in a waife condi-
tionth‘an thetothcr, can much leﬁ be supposed.

‘ Die: deﬁa'et, z «2312'»: namerare, quibu: 60m} ma]? wenerit:
m; mini“, )6 commmorem, guibuf imprabz': optime’. “The day
“would not hold out, if I should undertake to enumerate all
“the good men whom evil befel; nor would it, if I should
“reckon up all the wicked men, that have fared heft of all."
Cic'. This is jullly said; tho I account his instances not the
most lopposite.

05/?



384. ﬂe‘RnLIoroN af'NA'riuaz. seam.

- 05. It has been said, that «virtue tends to make
Men’s lives happy even here, 65:. and how then
can ‘the virtuous'be fuppoﬁed ever to be so wry
vii/arable .? Anﬂ In ordinary cases virtue does pro-
duce happiness:' at least it has indeed a natural
tendency to it; is the 'mean, by which it is most
likely to be attainedy and is therefore the way,
which a wife man would choole for his own fake.
But then it does not follow from hence, that there
are no perturbation: in human aﬁ‘airs; no cases, in‘
whichthe usual effect of virtue may be overpowerd
by 'diseases, violence, difaﬂzers. JIt does not ren-.
der men invalnemble; cannot command the“fia—
fom; ‘nor prevent many great calamities, under
which virtue and vice multo fall
(There may be a dint? road to a place; and such
a one, as he, who fets out for that place, ought to
be found in, and yet it is possible he mayimeet
with robber: or accident: in it, that may incom-
mode, or hurt him in his journey.) On the Other
side, vice and wickednrﬂr may be so circumﬂanti-
atod as to be attended with much greater plea/we
than pain, contrary to the tendency of its nature:
that is, a withdraw may be of a healthful make,
born to riches or power, or fortunately placed, for
attaining them; and from the advantagepof a strong
body, an ample fortune, many friends, or lucky
hits, he may derive pleast17w, which shall exceed
the present intanveniencie: and fighting: naturally
following from his vices b. -

Men’s

" Yet according to Ari/Fade he cannot be happy for all that.
His Opinion Diog. L. represents thus: a-alv épu’liv pi Jun aria-Jpn
are}: triangular treyJ‘éieSm ya‘p T57 rn moi €5,143:9 r5! 511.76: dyaS‘a‘i,

’ II-‘Ti'

Y'rutbs belonging to 4 Private Man, (it. 385

Men’s eirtnmﬂanees have a natural influence with
respect to ‘the present pleasures or sufferings, as
' well as their virtue or nice. No body sure ever
said, that all depends only upon these: nor,, when
the natural tendenceof them is aﬂhrted, is the natu-
ral tendence or effect of. the other denied. There-E
, fore indeed, when it is said that virtue naturally
tends to make men happy even here, the meaning
only is, that it tends to make men happy in pro-
portion to their circumstances; and vice does the
contrary. It is naturally productive of that part of
happiness, which is in our own power, and depends
upon ourselves; makes men more truly happy,
whatever their circumstances are, than they could
be without it, and commonly tends to mend their
worldly circumstances too: but it is not asserted,
that virtue can always entirely correct them, or
make men. so completely happy in this life, as that
their enjoyments shall exceed their mortifications;
no more than the vices of some particular men,
tho they bereave them of many solid pleasures,
and bring troubles upon them too, do hinder their
worldly enjoyments from being greater than their
present sufferings. Not only our being, but our
place, with the time, and manner of our being in
this worlddepend upon the Author of the scheme,
the manner of bebooing ourselves in our station‘ (ac-g

Mir [Air trot mid! min-1g“09‘: unﬂattering aegis htpikra uni
pi} nah-1,7 «a? Ema-3: met a) am‘ 099‘ oiled. " Virtue is not alone
“suﬂicicnt to produce happiness, because external good
“things and things relating to the body are also neceﬁ'ary----;
“'but vice is of ’itself sufficient to produce misery, and efpe-
“cially, if external good things and the things relating to the
1‘ body are joined with it”.

C c ' cording



cording to our endowments, and the talents we
have) only depends upon us. And perhaps (which
has been hinted already) He has so ordered things
On purpose, that from the «0mm compﬁtiom of
men’s circumstances with the natural eﬁ’eéts of
their virtues and vices, and the many inequalities
arising thence, they might see the necessity and cer-
tainty of another state: and that for this reason
there should always be some remarkable instances
of oppreﬁ innocence aridﬂaurg‘ﬂing wickednt/fr.

The upshot is,- that upon comparing those pita-
ﬁtrer, which are the natural effects of virtue with
tboﬁ ﬂfcringr, which are the natural effects of ill"
Conﬁiwtion or other calamity, tbq’é are many,
very many times found to exceed: and 2 contra‘rio,
n'pon balancing those @213, which are the genuine
effects of vice, against the advantage: resulting
from a fortunate estate, tbq/é may often be found
to outdo the other. Both tomde to reason, "if all
ends with this life, and after death be nothing.
For my part, if there were only some few, nay but
m instance of each kind in the world (unfortu-
nate virtue, and prosperous wickedness), it would
be "to me a sufficient argument for- afutarestateé
because God cannot be unjust or unreasonable in
any one instance. It must not be forgot here, that
many times men of great nice: have also gfaat'viﬁ
tuer, and the natural effect of these may qualify
that of the other, and " being added to their so—
vourable circumstances may help to turn the
scale. x
' If there is no other beside the present being, the
32mm! and uﬁml Rate of mankind is scarce con:
sistent with the idea of a reaﬁhdﬁle Cause. Let us

-' “’ conﬁde:

Truth kioqging tea Private Man, C56. 382'
conﬁde]: it aiittle 9. Not to mention' what we must
suffer from the tier): fetﬂment and rendition of this
world by hunger, thirst, heat; cold, and indispo-
sitions; er leaves one generation dropLs,’ 'and at»;
other springs up, to fall again, and be forgotten ‘.
As we come into the ‘World? with the labor of our
mothers, we soon go out of it with our own. Child-
bond and youth are much of them loft ininfenﬁbi-
‘ lity or trifling, vanity and rudeness; obnoxious to
many pains and accidents; and, when they are'fpent
in the best manner, are attended with labor and dz]:
cipline. t When we reach that stage‘ of life, which
usually takes us from our nearest relations, ' and
brings us out into the world, with what difficulty
are proper implgment; and stations found for us?
When we are got out, and left to scramble for our-
selves, how many bani/hp: and tricks are put upon
us, before we get the sagacity and dexterity to save
ourselves? How many chances do we stand? How
troublesome is bufmqﬁt made by unreasonableness,
ill nature, or trifling and want of punctuality in
the persons with whom we deal? How do we find
ourselves initantly surrounded with ﬁmre: from deé

c E! valet annale:_noﬂrprum nadir: 1450mm. “And it may
"‘ be of use' to hear a catalogue of our miSfortunes.” F Or as
Seneca says, Nulli contigz't imitate nafcz', “No man is born free
7“of them.” - e

d 'Ounmg pu’Mav yum}, mm:5; ivd‘eﬁm—a’r piwvlu, a? J‘dmuyu-
" The life of . man is like the leaves of trees;--,-some' spring
“forth, and others wither.” HOM. This is true not only of
single men, But even of cities (famous ones), kingdoms, em-
pires. One may say the same concerning many of them, that
Flora: says of Veii: Lbborai‘ annalium ﬁdes, at Veia: fug'ﬂé cre-
damw. “The credit of biliary is not quite sufficient, to con-
, ff Vince us‘that there ever was any-such city as Vez‘z'.”

C c 24 ﬁgning



388 mummies of NATURE. Se&.IX.

ﬁgning men, knaves, enemies (of which the best
men have some), opposite interests, factions, and
many times from a mischievous breed, whose chil-
dz]b or diabolical humor seeks pleasure in the unea-
siness of other people? Even in many of those
iaioymnte, which men principally propose to them-
felves, they are greatly disappointed, and experi-
ence shows, how unlike they are to the antecedent
images of them. They are commonly mixed ‘: the
apparatus to most: of them is too operose: the
completion of them seldom depends upon ourselves
alone, but upon a concurrence of things, which
rarely hit all right f: they are generally not only
less in practice, than in theory, but die almost as
soon as they are: and perhaps they intail upon us
a tax to be paid after they are gone. To go on
with the hiltory of human life: tho affairs go pros-
perously, yet still perhaps a family is increasing,
and with it new occasions of folieitude are intro-
duced, accompanied with many fear: and tender
apprehension. At length, if a man, through many
cares and toils and various adventures, arrives at
old age, then he feels most commonly his preAnres
rather increased, than diminished, and himself left
able to support them 3. The business he has to do

9 Labor malaria/o; dzﬂm'llima natara‘, ﬁcietate gaadam inter
[2 naturaliﬁnt'juuﬂa. “Pain and pleasure, though, in the nature
of things, the mail unlike each other, yet are united by
some natural bond." lev.

f Sensible of this, Socrates used to say, “it ‘Ta‘t you?“n3 cap'
1AM». dud cap' £1457 Single-3w, “We ought to seek pleasures
from ourselves, and not from others." S'ron.

8 Seaex, s9" [wiﬁ‘mie qaoq; curl: impar, “I am an old man,
‘ o “and unequal to the smallest cares:” as Seneca, of himself,
in Tamar.

grows



Truth: belonging to a Private Man, (3:; 389,

grows urgent upon him, and calls for elf/patch
moli of his faculties and active powers begin now.
to fail him apace: relation: and friends, who might
be helpful to him (and among them perhaps the
dear'Confort of all his joys, and all his cares h)
leave him, never to return more: wants and pain:'
all the while are multiplying upon him: and under this additional load he comes melancholy be:
hind, tottering, and bending toward the earth 3
till he either stumbles upon something which
throws him into the grave ‘,- or fainting falls of
himself. And must he end here? Is this the period
of his being? Is this all .? Did he come into the
world only to make 17is way through the prefs,’ ‘
amidﬂ: many justlings and hard struggles, with a!
belt only a few deceitful, little, fugacious pleasures interspersed, and so go out of it again? Can
this be an end worthy a first Cause perfectly reasonable? Would even any man, of commonsense and ,
good nature, send another upon a dgﬁmltjaurmy,
in which, though he might perhaps now and then
meet with a little smooth way, get an interval for
rest and contemplation, or be flattered with some
verdures and the smiles of a few dailies on the
banks of ~ the road; yet upon the whole he must
travel throngh much dirt, take many "wearifom
steps, be continually inquiring after some clew or
directions to carry him through the turnings and
intricacies of it, be puzzled how to get a competent uiatz'cam and pay his reckonings, ever and

h Raga: aﬂn’ez'eada: mate: Corg'agis, (9'6. “You must see the
funeral pile of your beloved Wife.” va.
' i 2/4139 «nae? odpm' «heifer Semi. “  matter
“pulh an old man into his grave.” Som.

Cc; anon

390 S‘b’eRsnmron of-NA'r-enn. .Se‘ﬁ. IX.

$10an in danger of being‘loll: in deep waters, and
beside, forced all the while to fence against: weather,
accidents, and mid robbers, who are every where
lying in wait for him: I say, would any one send
a man upon such a journey as this, only that the
man might faint and expire at the end of it, and
all his thoughts perish; that is, either for no end
at all, or for the punishment of one, whom I fup,
pofe never to have hurt'him, nor ever to have been
capable of hurting himi And now can we im-i
pute to God that, which is below the common lize
Of men I"? _ i t . ‘: .

Lam apt to think, that even among those,
whole state is beheld with envy, there are may,
who, if at the end of their course they were put to
their option, whether, without any respect to a so:
tun: ﬂgte, they would repeat all the pkafures they
have had in life, upon condition to go over again
also all the lime disappointments, the same vexa-
tions and unkind treatments from the world, the
same secret pangs and tedious hours, the same la-
bors of body and mind, the same pains and lick-g
neﬂ‘eS,, would be far. from accepting them at that
price}. , .. _.

1: Dali?“imuh are—rm w «:3: m Mam. n a)»; a I, an a.
oru'xnzrraiv a’flm Saipa'lkg" Mtge}! 'w'tgyS'pc 51774 ayﬂ‘gmse'p-Jur in;
crux“13361:  pdgyfu ~39‘ xpn’pvm 9 emu-hm,; .ér'ou Qﬁnet'uc, A.
Tatf'rQ‘o'ﬁiO'. “we are all upon a road.---When' you see
“upon the road plants,rand herbs, and water,Uand'whatever
“else happens to be worth'seeing there, are you not a little
“delighted with it? Then you go on, and. meet with ﬁones,
“and vallies, and predifaiées, ' and‘ ro’cks, and‘sometimes with
“wild bealis. Life is very like this.“BAS. ‘

' Nan mebercule ym'fgaam «(eff/er [vitae-3], my? deuteriu-

fair” “Truly nobody Would accept of (life), if it Was not given
.“them when they did not know it.” SEN. . -

L

Birt

e
II



Truth: belonging to a Private Man, c.- 3Q;

But here the case,- as I have put it, only relpeélg
them, who may be reckoned among the more for,
Jamie passengers: and for m, that makes his‘voy;
age so well, [boa/21ml: are tolt in tempests, and loft m,
How many never attain any comfortable fettlemc
in the world? How many fail, after they have at.-
taind it, by various misfortunes? What melan-
ehply, What distractions are caused in families by
inhumane or vicious husbands, false or peevish
wives, refractory or unhappy children; and, if .
they are otherwise, if they are good, what sorrow
by the loss of them; .. How many are forced by
necessity upon and very shocking employ-
:ments fora poo; livelihood ? How many subsist:
#19011 begging, borwﬂias... and other “lifts, nor
can do otherwise? How. many meet with sad acci-
dents. or fall into deplorable diseases Po Are,th all
companies, and the very. fireets filled with com.-
plaints, and grievances, and doleful stories?
verily believe, that .a great part of mankind may
ascribe their deaths to want and dejection. Serie-
oufly, the preﬁmt [late of Amankindisynaccountf-
able, ' if it has not some' connection with another,
and be not as it were the porch or entry to'it ".

1“‘Paulzﬁer te credeﬁtidaci i3“myth} anﬁa' warm-em ctlﬁorem 3
fprul‘are inde rerun: infra téjacentium fade:; CS" ecu/is in, di‘verfa
,porrlﬂis, AnAnantz': mandi turbines intact-e. - 7amﬁmli s9' ipfe
Inf/embeds, Es’c. “.Imagine yourself to be removed to the-top
“of some very high mountain, and see how the things that

“are. below you look; and turning your eyes every way, be-
“hold the trouble of a ﬂormy world. And then’ you will take
“pity on the inhabitants, ﬁfe.” St CYPR. . — man chum no: awn-:95 mm mm D5193,  -1

“This world is only like a porch to the world to come." P,
AAno'rn. - r ”
C c 4 Then



'39: ‘I'beRnLroroN ofNarunzl Se&.IX.

There is one thing more, of which notice ought
to be taken. To one, who carefully peruses the
ﬁory and face of the world, what appears to pre-
mil in it ? Is it not corruption, vice, iniquity, fol-
ly, at least? Are not debauching °, getting per so:
aut nefas, defaming one another, erecting tyrannies
'of one kind or Other, propagating empty and sense—
less opinions with bawling and fury the great buli-
nels of this world? And are not all these contrary
to reason .? Can any one then with reason imagine,
that reason should be given, tho it were but to a
few, only to be run down and trampled upon, and
then extinguished .9 May we not rather conclude,
that there must be firm: world, where reason will
have its turn, and prevail and triumph? Some
kingdom of reason to come P ?

5. In the last: place, that great expeﬂatian which
men have, of continuing to live in another Rate,
beyond the grave, has I suppose been commonly ad—
mitted as one proof, that they shall live; and does
seem indeed to me to add some weight to what
has been said. That they generally have had such

° 0 f M: is iIIa/icblimi/pecula cog/litqu ocular hm inﬁrtn
ﬁcretir, recludcre cubicularam obduﬂa: fares, s5’ ad con/Z‘ientim
lumimm penetralia occulta rg/Erare,‘ Ur. “0 that, when you
‘.‘ are placed upon the tap of that high tower, you could call
.“your eyes into the secret places, and unbar the doors of
“bedcharnbers, and lay opon their secret receﬂ'es to the dif.
“covery of the light, €9’c." Carlin. .

P Beside, there being no fatiety of knowledge in this life,
we may hope for future opportunities, when our faculties shall
be exalted, 55%. T5: aims-clue:9 8‘4: a" 3779' am: acws. e57
ieﬂﬂm ‘nirunv iaw'rr‘w Furies an» “They who are deﬁrons of
“011th, and 0f seeing things as they really are, can never
f be fully satisfied here.” PLUT.

an expectation, can scarce be denied. The histories
of mankind, their deifications, rites, stories of ap-
paritions, the frethent mention of' a tales, with
rewards and punishments hereafter, (sic. all tefti-
'fy, that even the Heathen world believed, that the
foul: of men survived their bodies. Their ignorance
indeed of the feats and circumstances of the de-
parted has wgot many error: and fapeﬂlitiom;‘ and
these have been .multiplied by licentious poet: and
idle ‘vi/ionairs‘: but this, being no more than what
is usual in the like cases, ought to be no prejudice

against: the fundamental opinion itself.
Cicero 9, tho he owns there were different opinions among the Greek philosophers about this matter; that, quod literi: extet', Pbereeyde: Syru: primam
dixit, animo: borizinum eﬂe ﬂmpiternosg that Pytba-
gora: and his school confirmed this opinion; that
Plato was the man, who brought a reason for it,
s3%. yet tells us plainly, naturam ipfam de immor-
talitate animorum tacitam judieare; that nefeio qua-
modo 'inbaret in mentiau: qua/i faealorum qaoddam
augurium; that permanere animo: arbitramur eon-
fen/it nationum omnium; and more to this purpose.
Now if this consent was only the efl‘eét of some
tradition, handed from parents to their children;
yet since we meet with it in all the quarter: of the
world (where there is my civility or sense), and in
all ages, it seems to be eowal to mankind itself,
and born with it. And this is sufficient to give a
great authority to this opinion of the soul’s immor-
tality. But this is not all. For it is supported by
all the foregoing arguments, and many other rea-
sonings and symptoms which'we    i   “
‘1 In Tee/c. (11]).

“\V «x x': s \- é» is . -
\, 'm\~\\".‘ si‘~.
 as





394 T53 1134-3019:: ofNA'rvu. Se&.IX'.

ourselves. r All which, put together, may at least
ju/izﬁ an expectation of a futqﬁtstate .: that is},
render it a just or reasonable expectation:. and
then this reasonable expectation. grows,
such, into a further Engine-115: that there will be
such a state. ‘ i '

Fancy a man walking in someretz'red field, far'
from, noife, and free from prejudice, to debate this
matter with himself,’ and then judge, whether such
meditatiomtas these.Would not be a .“I think
f‘ .maybefure, that neither lgfelcfryqﬂq, L nor the
“vegetative triée,-that ﬂone, that flower, that tree
,‘-‘. have any reﬂex thoughts: nor do the fézﬁti've
“Mme, that 'Iheep, that ox, seem to haveany
f‘ fuchthing, or but in the lowed: degree, and in
“irespect of present objects only. They ‘do not
“reason, nor di/Eqmrfe. I may therefore certainly
.“pretend to  fqmahing, mugged”: all these
v“things ’. I not only apprehend and consider
“these external ,aéjeﬂs acting at present upon my
“nerves, but have idea: raised within myselfof a
“higher order, and many: I can, not only‘ repte;
“sent to myself things, that are, orlm've ~been, btrt
"‘ deduce many other from them, make vexcurﬁon's
“into futurity, and foresee much of what will be,
“or at least may be; by-   I had a1-

' t Methinksthofe philosophers make but anodiqppemnee
in Rory, who, looking big and faﬁuons, .at the famegimc pro-
‘feﬂed, that their own souls were not superior to those of gnats.
‘ we. 0! mi; Soﬁe aired-wraith“pul‘h “we? «'3! x‘a'iav halogen immimﬂ.
and” 4-. gums” “ﬁlming—u) qua: +uxico-waiv198r ddl’lh-
youunwvxiv. “These men, who are'so swelled with pride,
“affirm, that, as to the ﬁrbﬂance, there is no difference be-

’« twixt the soul of a philosopher, and that of a gnat, or'
’“worm, or ' _y,-»or’ the soul of ahog.” as Big/e5. ~




“most



Truth: belonging to a Private Man, (9’6. 395
“most (aid, yet' into another world before—hand:.
“and, whether I shall liV1e in some other state afa
“ter death, or not, I am certainly a bang capable
‘~‘ ' of 'such- an expeﬁatiaﬂ, and cannot but be selici-
“tons about, in! ,none of which things can be said
“of .these dads, or those 5mm ’.‘ “Can Ithen be
‘." designed for nothing furibm than jolt to ’ eat;
‘3‘ drink,- sleeps Walk:aboma. and act upon this
25 with ‘; that is, to have nofurther being, than
Q“What theft: brutes hav’e, so far. beneath me P Can‘ .
‘5 I' be'made capable of such' . great .eapeﬂaﬂm,
“which thof‘c animals know nothing of (happier
“by far in this regard than I am, if we must die
“alike), only to be disappointed at last? Thus
“. phejed,’ ijiaft upon the confinessof another better
“world, and fed with hopes of penetrating into
9‘ it, and enjoying it, only to make a [hart appear-
“am: here “, and then to be shut out, and totalb
“ﬁmk? Mul’c I then, when I bid my 131’: farewell
“to these walks, when I close these lids, and
‘,‘ yonder blue regions and_all this scene darken
“upon ime'andgo out, adult I then only serve to
“furniﬂrduﬁz’to be  with the allies of .
“these bed: and plants, or with this dirt under
“my fan? Have I becn fetﬂ: far above 11mm in
f life; onlyjo. be [field with them at death 9”

' Alemddér after 'de'athlmight be in the same ﬂat: with his
muletier (M. 1mm), but Hamlet with his mule. _, 7 I

‘ Brwi: ,5)? hi: ﬁuéiu: "bomllix, “this is the. short-lived
“pleasurer of frail man,” may be jnﬁly said for all‘L'ucretim.

‘ It 'b‘dtﬁQ‘hnﬂ, 8 ﬁle: d1é9?d¢"17X3'u; the; 175131;.- “This
“world is a stage, life is the play; we come on, look about
s‘ - us, 'aﬁdgoibﬁiagain.” DE'MO‘CR. "

This

396 TbeRaL'toton ofNATURE. Sea. IX.

This argument grows [hanger in the apprehension of one, who is conscious of abilities and intellectual improvements, which he has had no opportunity here of showing and using, through want
of health, want of confidence, want of proper
place, want of liberty. Such improvements, and
the knowledge consequent upon them, cannot ultimately respect this Ante: they can be only an
enlargement, and preparation for another. That
is all they can be:' and if they are not that, they
are nothing. ‘ And therefore" he may be supposed
thus, further, to argue within himself.« “Can the
“Author of my reasoning faculties be himself so
“unreasonahle as to give me them, either not to
“employ them, or only to weary myself with useless pursuits, and then drop me? Can He, who
“is privy to all my circumstances, and to these
“very thoughts of mine, be so insensible of my
“case, as to have no regard to it, and not provide
“for it P”
- It grows stronger still upon the’ mind of one,
who reflecting upon the hard treatment he has
met with from this world, the little cause he has
given for it, the pains and secret uneasiness he has
felt upon that score, together with many other
sufferings which it was not in his power to prevent,
cannot but make a silent, humble appeal to that Be-
ing, who is his 14/} and true refuge, and who he
must: believe will not defeat him thus.

Lastly, it is strongest of all to one, who, besides
all this, endeavor: in the conduct of his life to ob

. " 7103!“! 12%)”! I'm-- y“Wifdom is in model! men.“
Prom. ‘

serve the laws of reason (that is, of his nature; and
that is, of the ﬂntbar of nature, upon whom he
depends) -, laments, and labors against: his own ﬁle
firmitie: -, ' implores the Divine mercy; prays for
some better state hereafter; acts and lives in the.
tape: of .one '3 and denies himself many things 11an
that view: on_e_,who by the exaltation of his reason
and upper faculties, and that, which is certainly
the effect of real and useﬁal philosophy, the prac-
tice of virtue, is still approaching toward a higher
manner of being, and does already talle something
spiritual and above this world. To such a one there
must be a strong expectation indeed, and the argu-
ment built upon it mustA&,prOWMOnable. For
can he be endowed with such capacities, and have
as it were overtures of immortality ‘ made him, if
after all there is no such thing? Must his private
acts and leaneeald exercises of religion be all loll “?
Can a perfect Being have so little regard to one.
who however inferior and nothing to Him, yet re..-
gards Him according to may: abilities in. the go-
vernment of himself ?

Are such meditation: and reflections as these well
founded, or not? If they are, it must be reasonable
to think, that God will satisfy a reasonable expat-
tatien. ' I .

There are other argument: for the immortality
of the soul, two of which I will leave with you,‘
to be ,at your leisure pondered well. The one is,
that, if the souls of men are mortal (extinguishd
at death), the case of brutes is by much preferable
to that of men. The pleasures of brutes, though but

1‘ pietati: boner? “Is this  reward of piety?
sensual,

398‘ The RELIGION of‘NA'rt'IﬁE. 868:.IX;

sensual, are more sincere, being palled afdiminiﬂld
by no diverting consideration: they go wbalb' into
them; and when they have them not, they shem '
iefs to want them, not thinking of them. Their
fafering: are attended with no reflection 1', but are
such as they are said to be p. 57. obf. 8. They
are void of cams; are under , no apprehension foi-
families and posterity; never fatigue themselves
with vain inquiries, hunting after knowkke which
must 'ptrlih with than; ate x mt anxious about
their faweﬁm ’, not can be disappointed of any
hopes or expectations'; and at last same sudden
blow (or a few minutes of unforg/cen pain) ﬁniﬂam
them, having never so mark as known that they
wen: mortal. '

The other is, that the soul is a prszch [(79.-
that, which brings vitality to the body. For how
would that, which has been proved to be a fab-
ﬁance, and at the same time is also a principle of
life, ends: [tab ,(as being what itis) ism“I
fey, howeanthata’ie ’, .‘unless if is annihilated

 erg

\

' Y Fen: pericula,  glidmf, ﬁgz'wtt: gm Wyn, ﬁtting
feat, 55:. “Wild b‘eacts, when they-see; any dnngers, ayoigi
“them; and; aﬁet' they have avoided them, they look no
“further, 632'.” 'SEN.. ‘ s
‘ 2.1mm mn‘vmoiwlunywninmwmnpnm NS
'13}. “They are not uneasy as men are whim they are alive,
“imagining that the end of them is to die.” 5. quoynn.

“.Sz't mibi perfua/z', fie fentio, aim-nfmper agitator: Minna,
net principium mam: babeat, guia j? 1'ij mama:; ac fuzz 97w“.
dam babitmm gﬂé mom, gain mmng [2: i9]? fit "Raw.
“I do verily believe, it is my real opinion, that becausem-
the soul is always in aﬁion, and has not any (extetnztl)
cause of its motion, because it moves itself;‘.1'here£ore nei-
g‘ .ther- will it ever have any end of its motion, because it will

“never



irrath Delvhgz'izg to a Private fMan, 80. 399
Here I begin to be very sensible how much I
want a guide. But as the religion of nature is my
theme, Ihrnuft'at present content myself with that
light which nature ai'ibrds‘; my business being, as
it seems, only to mow, what a Heathen philosopher;
without any other help, and almost drodidaxirG';
may be supposed to think. I hope that neither the
doing of this, nor anything e112: contained in this
Delinedtibri; 'caii‘bé the least prejudice to any other"
true religion. IWhatev'er 'is immediately rweqld
from God, ’ni‘uﬂz, as well as any thing else, be treat-g
ed as being whiz} it is:. Which cannot be, if 'it‘ is
not treated With ' the highest regard, believed and
o'hyd. ‘ That therefore, which has been so much
insisted on by 'me; and is as it Were the burden
my fong, is 1'0 'far from undermining true rweald
relzgian, that it rather paves the way for its recep-
tion. This I take this opportunity to remark to
you once for all. And so returning to my philo-
sopher, I cannot iinag'in but that even be would
have at least some such general thoughts as thefea

“- never defett idélf.” CIC. That in Greg. 77.1mm. is like this
thought of 7147!}!: 'H 4km}, au'fruhmo: fut, s‘ﬁaroﬂ tn? Jun Im-
Mimr duke-3s? )4") In; adeouwivrq. «'6 «33‘ urn-6r Jaw «6 J3 ﬂa‘
urn-(iv ai'vrauvo'r 391, an. “The soul, because it is able to inovg
itself, can never cease to be; for it is a necessary consequence of self-motion, to be always in motion; and what is
always in motion, cannot cease to move.” But that in St
Anﬂz‘n comes something nearer to my meaning: E/z‘ animmwié
ta qmdam, una'e omne quad animatum q/I‘ whit-"Non ergo pate/I
animus mari. Nam/i carere poterit'rvz'ta; non animus ﬁd anima—
tum alz'guz'd “The soul is a sort of life, whence it follows;
that every thing which has a soul is alive;-.--wherefore the
soul cannot die} for, if it could be without life, it would.
not be a soul, but something with a soul’f


which make up almost the remainder of this lat!
section.

IX- The soul, when it part: from this graft 5015,
will past by same law into same newfeat, or state, agree-
able to the nature of it ”. Every species of beings
fnuf’t belong to same region, or Rate. Because no.
thing can be, but it must be some where, and some
how: and there being different kinds of abodes
and manners of subsisting in the universe, and the
natures of the things, that are to exif’c in them,
being also different, there will be a greater congruity between these several nature: respectively and
same particular places, or states, than there is between them and others; and indeed such a one,
that out of those perhaps they cannot subsist, or
not naturally. To those therefore must be their
respective tendence:: to those they are adiadged by
the course of nature, and constitution of things,
or rather by the Author of them ‘.

While the soul is in the body, it has some powers
and opportunities of moving it spontaneously, or
otherwise than it would be moved by the mere
laws of gravitation and mechanism. This is evio

5 The transmigration of souls has been much talked of: but
ta [mtmtia,- uguom'am ridiada, 53’ Mint dignior, yuan: [25015, It:
refelli guide»: sin?) deéet; quad facit, videtw' wereri, as quit
id eredat, “that opinion—--is so ridiculous, that it is ﬁtter for
“the Rage than the schools, and therefore ought not seriously
“to be confuted; and he who attempts it, seems to be afraid
“that nobody should believe it." So Laﬂantiw. Indeed who
can but laugh, when he reads in Lucian of Homer's having been
a camel in Baﬂrz'a, etc.

C Xapt'i'r 9439 July" ora‘ 3pm" «red: «'3 Mom. “For, of
“cestiry, like things man go to each other.” HIEROCL.

dent,“



ﬁatbrﬁelangz‘itg m aPriavatc‘Mdn, 8c. 401'
dent. But yet, notwithstanding this, the weight of
-that body, to which zit present his limited (among
othercaqfes) conih'ains *it‘t‘o “act for a, while upon
this ﬂag. That general law, to which bodies are
- «subjected, makesit ﬁnkin this “Anid of air, To much
lighter than itself; keeps .it down; ahd so deter-
~mio's the feat of it, and of the foul .in it, to be
Upon the surface'of this earth, where,:or in whose
neighborhood it was first produced. But then,
-when the “foul shall be disengaged from the gross
~ma’tter, which now inclof'cswand incumbers it, and
either become nukedfpz'rit, or be only veiled in its
own fine and obsequious Winkle, it m'uﬂ: at
same time be either freed from the law: of bodies,
--and 'fall "under fine atber, which will carry it to
Tome perm manﬁon, or Rate 4 g or at least by the
1914’ aim-be capable of mounting'upwards °, in pro.
portion to the volatility of its, vehicle, and of
-.emerging out of these regions into some medium
.more suitable, and (if . the“philosopher may say so)
eequi'libtious. Thus much as to thogehemlstate of

‘souls after death. But then, i
'3 Ex 'liaimih' citywideer 33h aim tm'ckﬁit lotion, 4:43qu 5!:
64/9, qui-ﬁluta} tvinadz': afn'ma: beam recipitﬁnu. “1t will'moutit
‘ “np’ from this 710W .meah:‘place, into that, whatever it be,
"‘ which receive's those souls,'th'atzare freed from their impri-
sonment, into its happybofom.” 84m. in 4-3: firm: «59':-
(41:30!“a‘ﬂ'OCb‘th i 'l'" M31, J" dﬂﬁr urn-r, Mun: we): (1'6:
«:3! «.415: 543195 «Mamie mic 3e!" w‘faiar aipcicaivdfa. “The
," putting off these human infections, and putting 0o virtues.
,c as so mywings, willcai'ry us to that pure region of virtue,
“where we shall live adivine life.” HIEROCL.
, c DQaﬁtﬁ/a'tiné', lewior Wabbit adicczlum. “Having laid
" 'down our burden, [we shall ,fly the lighter to heaven." St '
452.015. , '

Dd  XI»



.402 ﬂeRnLror‘ou of NATU'RE. Seé‘t.IX.s

‘ 'X. In ibis new ﬂat, or place of abode, there may
be dzfm'nt station befitting the (12' 3787168: of parti-
cular souls among themselves, as they are more or 14;
pzrfeﬂ in their kind. We see even inanimate bo-
dies, which have different gravitiesgﬁgures, im—
pulses, etc. settle into some order among them-
selves, agreeable to theft differences. And so by
the same universal rule in nature (viz. that diffe-
rences in things are attended with answerable rc-
lations and effects) foul: must also take their situ-
ation in [am kind of order according to their diﬁ'e—
.tenccs. .

XI. T122 great diﬁ'rme of human forth, with 're-
flee"? to perfection and impetfeﬂz’on, lie: in their dif-
ferent dqree: and habits of reasonableness or unrea-
jbimélcnqﬁ 3. That is to say,’ act only in men’s dif-
ferent improvements, or neglects and abuse of their

7 Thej‘erwr, who generally say, that by the praﬁice of re-

' ligion the soul acquires perfection and life eternal, lay‘ Inch 9.
firefs upon habit: of piety, that .R: A150 makes theeffect ofgiv—
ing IOOO zuzz'u “pence "in charity at once by no means equal
to that of giving one use “penny,” 'and repeating it 1000
‘ times, nrmo mp my: firm We mum mom
mm Dye mm Soon nnwpe n‘n-u ~mun “The
.“continuing to repeat the doing of a thing will procurea
“higher de me (of reward) than the doing the whole at once."
a “me gum moi Tum mun my.) mm; ‘73
wqgn mmvn mm 'nvsbzn 53mm firm wan Warm

. 19 cm 1mm “mien “nun nan-mu gun m‘n firm.
“He that does the Commandment of the Creator, shall be
'“blessed; he shall find good ﬁtanding-«and that reward
, “which folldws good understanding, igifthat the soul shall
-“continue after the body is‘c‘onl‘urhed, and shall be united to
u the underliandin‘g‘of‘i‘ts Maker, and be enabmhecﬁo etc:-
ﬁ‘nity.” Is. Lew."  ¢
‘ ‘ " * rational


rational faculties; but also in the greater or less in-
Anence of these upon their actions, and by consequence in their different degrees of virtue, or vice.
For a man is accounted a reasonable man, when he
reasons rightly, and follows his reason: in which
expression virtue must be included, being (as
p.; 36, s9" 4!.) nothing but the practice of reason;
and truth. i I '

That men are reasonable, or the contrary, in.
different degrees is plain. Some reason well upon
same subjects, but in respect of others, to which
they have not been accustomed, are dim and con-
fused: or they are partial to their vices and paf-
ﬁons, their old impressions and parties; and so
their reason is not general, nor has its due extent, ‘
'or influence. Others, whose reason is uncultivated
and weak, tho they have virtuous inclinations,
many times fall into fupeﬂiitz’on and obfurdz'tieeg
milled by authorities, and over-awed by old, or
formal modes of speaking, and grave non-sink.
Many, if not the most, seem to have scarce any
notion of reasonuor virtue at all, but act fortuitous-
.ly, or as they see other folks act; moved either
.by bodily prOpenlions, or by example. Some few
there are, who endeavor to improve their under—
standings, to discover what is agreeable to reason,
and to fix their opinions; and conduct their live:
accordingly. And in all these [were] kind: there
are various degrees of elevation in knowledge and
virtue, and of immersion in vice and ignorance,
and new differences arising endlessly. —All this is
visible.

Now the foul, reflecting, finds in itself two ge-
neral faculties, one, by which it understands, and
judges, and reasons (all which I‘cqr'n'prehend un-
der the "term raiz'omzl faculties; "or 're‘aﬁin) -, ’.ar'id “dit-
o'tlnfr, by'which lit wills, 'or determines’to hé‘t, 5c-
éOrding tb the judgments and ednélu’ﬁéds made iii
the upper part of  J'An'd “the moije-pérﬁﬂly
performs'th'efe operations (1'. '3. the more truly)?
Ireasons, and the more'readz'ly it wills and eiéeciites
the decisions of teafon), the more perfect‘ Ce'i‘taih'ly
it mtiﬁ be ih its‘kirid‘ganti 'the m6r‘e‘jir‘r‘f e’rfeétly,
the xiibije‘inipetfeét. ‘ Theita'chiﬁplifh‘rhénts there‘-
fore Lind geifeﬂz‘qm of htiman ‘lfouls, and the cm:—
irmy, r‘nu‘l‘t 'be in ‘pro‘pb’f'tioh to the ‘fdremeﬁtiohd
flifermccs.

XlI. Atcordz'ng to they} 'dzbfirehée: flier: it is‘rea‘
ﬁnaéle _'to 't/aizz‘kjbe joub’éf menjwz'llﬂnd Meir/t'atz'oﬂ:
in [be farm? world ". This‘is but a'comllary ﬁé‘m‘
Svhzit‘gqes before. _ _ ' , I .

. Oéj. -Wh‘y should We t'hlhk, that Got! 'c'diifes
things to be in such'a mariner, as that 'in the futh
ﬁat? rrien Hiall be placed 31nd ‘tilr‘eat’erd according'to
their merit, and the progi'efs the")! shave 'made in
freai'on and Virtue, wheh'iNe see the case to be Wide]
diﬁ'eteht in this? ﬂnf. AItfriit'Jl’t be rEhiémberd, “that
Othat'thi‘s'is oneiOf those ver’y‘réézfaﬁ: Oh Which the
belief of the sbill’s'ihimbi'thlityzisilbﬁtidEd. NEW,
_if it be reasonable to‘believk 'thei‘e‘is'ag future (life,
becaluse things? are dealtleiéq‘gjzxmlly‘dow, upbn that
‘ver'y'fcb‘re‘it will be reéfén'able'tb‘ thiiik, that they
’are dealt égiley i in that diheri‘ll'étc. I

h T5473“tradﬂﬂ.“‘73" JP‘W- “Places fitted for virtue.’;PLATo.
f  1. With an eqtial or iinpartiéi regardhoiiieijﬂnfén's defers:
.‘pquitably. . .

Herc



frat/73 éeloizging to q Eriyate Man, 55:. 405
Here éodz'ly wants  aﬁeﬁions, and fuel) things
as proceed from them,  ~ihtermix with human
affairs, and do confound; merit with demerit, knotte—~
sedge with ignorance: and hence it comes to pan
many times, that bad men enjoy much, and good
men suffer, and both are, if there is no other Rate,
in their wrong places. But, when the corpora?
mufés of misplacing shall be removed, [pzfrz'tr (or
spirits and: their a’aiyttqwat tafvaamxai) may be I.tu
ppfed more regularly to take their due poﬂs and
privileges: the impudentand vicious will haveno:
fuel; qppqrtunirie: of getting into circumstances, of
which they are unworthy, not improved and vir-
tuous minds find such obﬂmﬂz’on: to keep them
down in circumttanceso unworthy of them. Be
fare the more advanced and pure any state is, the
more properly will the inhabitants be ranked, and g
the jujler and more 7244441 will the fubordinatioq "
of its members be. '
Even bare we commonly find men in that kind
' of business for which they are educated and pm;
pared; men of the same. professions generally keep-
jpg together -, the virtuous and reasonable dgﬂring
to. be (tho they not always. can be) with their like ";
and the vicious (as they'scarcely‘cannot be) with
theier ‘ And why should we not think, that an a]:
fociation and communion of souls with those of their
own he, disposition, and habits may be more
union/211 and, comical, when those things, which
in great measure hinder it here, shall be no more?

3 317095! 33') Jaime fawn Aria-014479: dream}. “Good men,
“when left to their own liberty, go to those entertainments
“where good men-are’f. E. PLAT;


If we may think this, certainly those fields or flares,
in which the virtuous and wise shall meet, must
be different from those in which the foolish and
wicked shall herd together ”‘. The very difference
of the company will itself create a vast difference in
the manner of their living.

XIII. The man/ions, and condition: of the virtuous
and reasoning part must he proportionath better than
those of the foolish and vicious. The proposition
cannot be inverted, or the case be otherwise, if
the constitution of things depends upon a rea-
fonable cause: as I have endeavored to showrit
does.

Cor. Hence it follows, that the practice of rea/btt
(in its just extent) is the great preparative for death,
and the means of advancing our happiness through all
our subsequent duration. But moreover,

XIV. In the future state refoett will he'had not
only to then’: reasonittg, and virtues, or the contrary,
hut also to their iii/oyment: and fufiring: here “. Be-
cause the forementioned inequalities of this world

. 1 Oi ctmoooeuuiﬂc 5936:, 01' 0:313:35: 9045709019 “they who
“rightly philosophize, or they Who are truly philosophers,"
In Plato‘s style. ‘-.

"1 Tuw’liaaﬂae aria-8‘: EMTVQ’ (A!; W?! uni, usage; e619 ou‘
“gnu,:23st ﬂ «nip «0"ch 5,1016’1'870 '73: J‘tayayi: du‘ 3580:, any)
uni: omtv’lu. “Thatplace, in which there are no evils, will
“not receive them (the wicked) but they shall be with one an-
“other,and continue for ever to lead the same sort of life that
“they led here.” PLATO.

, n Ei «vain «73v agape-master» uoadfs‘lau [5 41mm], cgeSiu
award": au‘mji Mylfﬂdh “If (a good man) be punished (here)
beyond what his sins deserve, all that is above what he,
justly deserves, shall be accounted for to him.” CHRYS.


. fratln' belonging to a Private Man, Eir. 407

can by. no means be redressed, unless men’s enjoy-
ments and sufferings, taken together with their
virtues and vices, are compared and balanced. I
say, taken together: because no reason. can be assigned, why a vicious man should be recompensed
for the pains and mischiefs and troubles, which he
brings upon himself by his vices, as the natural consequences of them; nor, on the other side, why
any deductions should be made from the future
happiness of a good man upon the score of those
innocent enjoyments, which are the genuine fruit of
his moderation, regularity, other virtues, and sound
reasoning.

Cor. Wicked men will not only be less happy than
the wise and virtuous, out no really unhappy in that
state to come. For when all the happiness, that answers to those degrees of virtue, which they had,
and those sufferings, which they underwent, above
what was the natural effect of their wickedness 5
say, when that is subtracted, what remains upon
the account will be something below no-happiness: which must; be fdme quantity of po/itz't'e un-
happiness, or misery.

Thus there will be rewards, and punishment:
hereafter: and men will be happy, or unhappy, according to their behavior, enjoyments, and fuﬁeﬁ
ings in this present life. But,

XV. If the immortality of the soul cannot be demonstrated, yet it if certain the contrary cannot °.- To
‘ ‘ say,

.0 Sure those arguments in Lucretia: can convince nobody,
Nnnc quoniarn, gnaﬂati: undiqne rvqﬁs, Dgﬂnere bumorm, Eff 1a-

:icen: difredere rerni:; Cred: animanr qnoguc diﬂ'undi, s9’5 “For

"408 The'RELIGI-ON ofNAT-Ugm SeéngX.

say, when a boa/e is ruinous and fallen, that it once
had, an inhabitant, and that he is escaped out of it,
and lives in some other place, can involve no contradiction, or absurdity P. And,

XVI. 5" the immortality of the soul should be considered only as a probability, or even as a abamopof-
ﬁble, yet fill a virtuous life is to be preferred before
its contrary. For if the soul be mortal, and all per-
ception perishes forever at our death, what in this

“we see that, as soon as the vessel is broken in pieces, the liquor runs all about; so the soul likewise will be dissipated,
“s5’5" And Pretterea gigm' parim cam (01120” s9’ ma Cry/Ear:
ﬁntz'mm, parka-qua ﬁmybere maxim, etc.- ann  fatigue
dfﬂblwifateare neceﬂé eﬂ; Qgtandoguidep peach-ant in em conta- .
gia morbi. “Further we‘ see that the soul, and the body are
produced together, and increase and grow old together also,
5.9%. Wherefore we cannot but own, that: the foul must be
dissolved: for the contagion of the disease reaches to it.”.
Nor those in P1132} (N. H. 7. 55.): if there really are any at
all. For to plead the aatageaita/e experimental, “argument
“drawn from what we were before we were born,” is to be
the question; which may be put thus, Whether we shall after
death be more conscious of our existence, than we were before
we were born. And if Dz'warcbm's Lg/biad wan extant, I be. _
iligve we should find nothing shanger in them. The truth seems
to be, 06 Bah-7nd xua‘; isotraﬂor. Jun minded? 4.03031, H That a
“wicked man does not desire that his foul should be immortal;" but he comforts himself with this thought, that
Maﬁa) 3-4940” “‘imdiawﬁ: “the being 11thng aftef death,”
will prevent future sufferings. This is air a3 pi I712: xwrapvwi,
“to have recourse to non-existence." HIEROCL.

P Nor that the soul still exists ignpor Mums“(alig- rar night-
gov the”, v“having left the house, in which it lived, defolam.”~
P H, JUD. Domu: ab babz'tatore deﬂrta dilabitur:---53’ corpus,
reliAnm ab am'ma, deﬂait: “A house that is forsaken by the
inhabitants, becomes ruinous:—--and a body, after it is for-
faken by the soul, decays.” LACT.


case. does a good man lose by his virtue? Very
rarely more than somen acts of devotion, and instances of mtg’ﬁcatim, which too. by custom grow
habitual andeafy. ‘1, and it may be pleasant by be-
ing (or seeming at least to be) teabnable. On the ‘
other hand, what does a vicious man gain. .3 Only
such enjoyments, as a virtuous man leaves: and
those are such, as most commonly owe their being
to a vitiated tai’te; grow. insipid in. tithe; require
more trouble and contrivance to obtain them, than
they. are worth; go. off disagreeably; are, followed
many times by [harp reflections and bitter penances,
in the rear; and at bell; after aihort time findin‘
nothing, 4:. if that bad never 12:01. This is all '.,
But then if the soul prove to be immortal, (as we
have all the reason in the world to. think it will),
what does the virtuous roan gain .? His present
pleasures (if not so many) are more sincere- ‘
natural ‘ g and the effect of his felﬂdenials and submiﬂion to reason, in order to prepare lueffectlf for
a future state, is the happineisof that state: which,

'1 Maple“gg‘ 393w: Jpn: 'sw’aw'ralv [£90757]. Kau‘ Iris”): e3 053’s
7.». imivl" sit Jasper haug'l’siﬁa rhesus-cine. “The way to vir-
“tue is long and keep, and very rugged at first; but, after!
“you are come at the top, it then becomes easy.” HESIOD.

‘ Cale prefeer Admir. “Adam': is preferred to heaven."

0 '0 cipwf ham-hr» arm's; dm'latpwl’kr “print. “He who
excels in virtue, reaps pleasures that can never be repented
of.” HIEROCL.

‘ Iftbe soul was mortal, yet the virtuous man eh iawe; «rates-
Jrrm-a inhuman» in? aim?” mﬂpnoc dyes-o", «Marlyn: 3mm: in
u‘ gadget. up; yap a; «a 085:4, an. “becomes as perfect as he
can be, reaps his ov’vn proper good, being truly blessed and
happy: and the bodyalfo, €9’c." Stun.‘ ‘


without pretending to describe it, may heupresumed
to be immortal, because the soul is so-, and to be
purer and of a more exalted nature (2'. e. truer, and
greater) than any of these low enjoyments here, be:
cause that state is every way in nature above this, .
And again, what does the wicked man 10/2? That

happiness, which the virtuous gain as such; and

he links, beside, into some degree of the unbappi-

rte/3‘ of that future (late: of which one may say in

general, that it may be as much greater than the

unhappiness or sufferings of this world, as the happiness and joys of that are above those of this.

In a Rate that is spiritual and clear every thing
will be purer, and operate more directly and
strongly, and (if the expression maybe tolerated)
with more spirit: there will be fewer obl’cruétions.
to either happiness or unhappiness: the soul will
lie more open, and have more immediate and acute
perceptions of either: so that each of them in their
kind will be more intense, the one nearer to pure
or mere happiness, the other to the contrary “. But
to enter further into the nature and economy of
the yet unknown world is too arduous an under-
taking for my philosopher.

I shall only add, that the rea/aaing and vz‘ﬁuaar
man has at least this advantage over the foalé/Zz and
profligate, that, though his wisdom and virtue cannot
always rectify that which is amiss in himself or his

- I "as-I (at? Id»! In; was «against oro‘y crash?» a; eat/M, «Ind a)

mac»; «r5 id‘on“: ﬂair, J‘i 3‘» pc’rm Jami sic annular 69am“u‘mlywSau.

. “So that a good man excels a bad man not only in goodness.
but he exceeds him in pleasure also, by which alone the bad
man was led to be wicked.” Huanocn.

D

circumstances, they will find means to alleviate
his pressures and disadvantages, and support him
under all the anomalies of life, with comfort: of
which the other knows nothing: particularly this,
the enjoyment of a humble, but well grounded
expectation rof ﬁlicity hereafter, sincere and durable ". ‘ i

XVII. Hc cbcrcforc, who would all according to
truth, mic/l, in the lal’c place, not only consider tuba:
be is, and how circumstantiated in this present state,
and provide accordingly; but, far tbcr, in.qu conﬁde?
himself also as one wbo/c cxi/lcnce proceed: on into an-
other, and provide for that too. How I think this
is to be done, by this time I hope you fully apprehend.

For a conclusion of the whole matter; let our conversation in this world, so far as we are concerned,
and able, be such as acknowledges every thing to
be what it is (what it is in itself, and what with
regard to as, to other beings, to cause5, circumstances, consequences): that is, let us by no act deny
any thing to be true, which is true: that is, let us
act according to reason: and that is, let us act according to the law of our nature. By bone/fly cndca-J
vowing to do this we shall express our duty " to

1' 03 yet}? “was 1-57 idem, cl pmﬂr JAM oMovwﬁan, 11W 0sz
harm 7| ma‘alacc implxxau. “If the righteous do not excel
the wicked in any thing else, yet they do in their expectations of happiness." Isocn. '

1 Tgén'@’ yelp 99:? Sugars!“Err-o: 5015141“; [Jointly a'pmu’vJ' “F or
(to practice virtue) is the most sacred manner of worshipping
God.” Joe.

‘1?
I;



412» The Reluctant quA'rvnn, See}. IX.

 who. is the: Anthrax. of it. andlof MW s and:
at the same time prosecute our; Oren mm haPPi:
99% (the: happiness of WW1 kings» Wsﬂnﬂ 49
what tends to make “$4 easy. hcxc, and. bequﬂifmg
ourfchres and preparing for 0»: mmwal 11th
our long home 3. . that great rwolatien, which, as
the farthest, cannot be very far off.

And now, Sir, the trouble is  over for the
present, not properly which I give you, but which
you have brought upon yourself,  being
2’bouglrts, which you rig/fired: unless I have any,
where misrepresented myself through iqqéoerlmqq;
which I own may  At the fact of the page I I
have in some places subjoined a few lifelg ftr’iﬂindrest ,
principally of antiquity, after the manner   annotations: such, as, when I came to revise these ﬂgeets,
I could recollect upon the sudden Y.; igggp‘g‘ 33
common-place bop]; to help me, nor ought of
any such thing before that time. They may serve
perhaps sometimes a little to explain the text;
sometimes to add weight; but chiefly 9° 4W4
you, who know  well 11.9.“: s9 improxe an);
the lmﬁ lain; out of the Ancients! and   “gill
want to be diverted. I have also printed a fexg co:
pics of this Skegcb, not with any design to make it
public, but merely to save the trouble of twig/crib;
iig '; being minded, ’linc'e I have made it,.to‘ leave
it not only with yon, but perhaps   tny or

y some morewere added in the (mud impreﬁon.
2 Nothing more was intended at  ' F A

three

Truth: belonging to a Private Man, 86. 413:

three other friend:: or however, with my Family,
as‘ a private monument of one that meant well.
Though, as to the disposal and fate of it, much will
depend upon your judgment and manner of acceptance.

'WILLIAM WOLLASTON;

H n
1-: m N:1:
« Who is like unto God 9". <!-- but see: https://books.google.com/books?id=WkwAAAAAYAAJ&pg=PA174&dq=Maimonides+having+proved+that+there+must+be+some+being&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjiw6C3m8LPAhVP5WMKHWlJB7EQ6AEIIjAB#v=onepage&q=Maimonides%20having%20proved%20that%20there%20must%20be%20some%20being&f=false -->
And “Praised be God."f '





<li>So, in Plato, Socrates requires of Euthyphro not to teach him <i xml:lang="grc">ἕν τι ἢ δύο με διδάξαι τῶν πολλῶν ὁσίων, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκεῖνο αὐτὸ τὸ εἶδος ᾧ πάντα τὰ ὅσια ὅσιά ἐστιν</i> “one or two particulars of the multitude of things that are just and right; but to show him the original pattern itself, by which everything that is just and good becomes so,” And again, <i xml:lang="grc">ταύτην τοίνυν με αὐτὴν δίδαξον τὴν ἰδέαν τίς ποτέ ἐστιν, ἵνα εἰς ἐκείνην ἀποβλέπων καὶ χρώμενος αὐτῇ παραδείγματι, ὃ μὲν ἂν τοιοῦτον ᾖ ὧν ἂν ἢ σὺ ἢ ἄλλος τις πράττῃ φῶ ὅσιον εἶναι, ὃ δ᾽ ἂν μὴ τοιοῦτον, μὴ φῶ</i>. “Show me the original image or picture, that I may see what sort of a thing it is, and when I look upon it, and make use of it as the original pattern, I may be able to affirm, that an action performed by you or any other person, if it be of such a sort, is just and good; and, if it be not of such a sort, then I cannot affirm it to be so.” <i xml:lang="la">Posce exemplar honesti.</i> “Enquire after the original pattern of virtue” (Lucan).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Οἶδε τό γ᾽ αἰσχρὸν,  χανόνι τοῦ χαλοῦ μαθών.</i> “He knows what vice is, having been taught by the rule of virtue” (Euripides). <i xml:lang="la">Adsit Regula, peccatis quæ pœnas irroget æquas</i>, says Horace. Now by the same <em>rule</em>, by which punishments are justly proportioned, crimes must be distinguished amongst themselves; and therefore much more, crimes from no-crimes, and crimes from good actions. So that it is at bottom a <em>rule</em> which can do this, that is required.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Formula quædam constituenda est: quam si sequemur in comparatione rerum, ab officio nunquam recedemus</i> (Cicero). “There ought to be some rule established: which if we follow in comparing things with each other, we shall never fall short of our duty” (Cicero).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Πώς οίόν τε ἀτέκμαρτα εῖναι καἰ ἀνεύρετα τὰ ἀναγκαἰότατα ἐν ἀνθρώποις; Ἔςιν οὖν [κανών τις]</i> (Arrian).</i> “How is it possible that those things which are necessary for men (to know or to do) should be such, as they can have no certainty of knowing or finding out? There must then be [some rule].”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Ubi virtus, si nihil situm est in pisis nobis?</i> “Where is virtue then, if there be nothing within our own power?” (Cicero).
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">הוא עמוד התורה והמצוה …רשות לכל אדם נתונה אם רצה להטות עצמו לדרך טובה</i> “There is a power given to every man, if he be but willing to incline himself to the way that is good—This is the support of the law and the commandments.” (Maimonides). <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">הרשות היא הבחירה</i> “This power is what we call free will," <i><abbr>Nahh.</abbr> <abbr>ab.</abbr></i><!-- double-check the Hebrew on that last quote; also, what is Nahh Ab (a book of some sort)?--></li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Lacrymæ pondera vocis habent.</i> “Tears have the force of words" (Ovid).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Oculi, supercilia, frons, vultus denique totus, qui sermo qui dam tacitus mentis est, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “The eyes, the eyebrows, and indeed the whole countenance are a kind of tacit speech of the mind, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>” (Cicero). <i xml:lang="la">Nutu signisque loquuntur.</i> “They (Piramus and Thisbe) speak to each other by nods and signs.” (Ovid). <i xml:lang="la">Est actio quasi sermo corporis.</i> “Every action is a sort of a speech of the body.” (Cicero, and often repeated by him.)</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">איש אוז מולל ברגליו</i><!-- double-check --> “A wicked man speaks by his feet.” (A Hebrew Proverb.)</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Τὸν κατὰ τῆς κινήσεως λόγον σιωπῶν περιεπάτησεν</i> “Without saying anything against the argument about motion, he got up and walked about.” (Sextus Empiricus) So Menedemus reproved luxury by eating only olives (Diogenes Laërtius). And others are mentioned by Plutarch, who <i xml:lang="grc">ἄνευ φωνῆς ἃ δεῖ φράζειν</i>, did declare “what they had to say without making use of words.”</li>
<li>Macrobius</li>
<li>Where we find <i xml:lang="grc">φίλοι τε φίλοις καὶ πολῖται πολίταις… ἐς χεῖρας ἀλλήλοις ἐλθόντες</i> “that friends and fellow-citizens fell into each other’s hands.” (Thucydides)</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Τοις οἰκείοις ὡς πολεμίοις ἠμύνοντο</i> “They revenged themselves upon their own people, as if they had been their enemies” (Diodorus Siculus)</li>
<li>Valerius Maximus</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Ἀνθρώποισιν οὐκ ἐχρῆν ποτὲ τῶν πραγµάτων τὴν γλῶσσαν ἰσχύειν πλέον</i>: “There never could be any necessity that mens tongues should be of more force (to declare their intentions) than their actions.” (Euripides) <i xml:lang="la">Quasi intersit, audiam, an videam.</i> “As if there were any difference whether I hear you, or see you.” (Cicero)</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Ἡμεῖς τὸν ὠνούμενον βιβλία Πλάτωνος ὠνεῖσθαί φαμεν Πλάτωνα <abbr>κλ</abbr>.</i> “He who buys Plato’s books, we say, buys Plato” (Plutarch).</li>
<li>Virgil and Theocritus</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">ותטמ שמשמ</i> “On the bed together” (Rashi).</li>
<li>Only <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">ענון נשוק וחיבוק</i> “kissing and embracing her,” according to Alshek.</li><!-- double-check this Hebrew -->
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Ὦτα γὰρ τυγχάνει ἀνθρώποισι ἐόντα ἀπιστότερα ὀφθαλμῶν</i> “Men do not usually give so much credit to their ears, as to their eyes” (Herodotus).</li>
<li>That instance of Menelaus and his guest Alexander, in Arrian, might be subjoined to this. <i xml:lang="grc">Εἴ τις αὐτοὺς εἶδεν φιλοφρονουμένους ἀλλήλους, ἠπίστησεν ἂν τῷ λέγοντι οὐκ εἶναι φίλους αὐτούς</i> “If anyone saw them treating each other in a very friendly manner, he would not believe a person who should say that they were not friends.”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">De duplici martyrio ad Fortunatum</i></li>
<li>Something like this is that in one of Gregory Nazinzen’s orations. When some Christians, who had been ensnared by Julian, asked, <i xml:lang="grc">πῶς Χριστὸν ἠρνήμεθα</i> “How have we denied Christ?” They were answered, <i xml:lang="grc">ὅτι κατὰ τοῦ πυρὸς ἐθυμιάσατε</i> “you have offered incense on the altar.”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Τὰ ψενδῆ πράγματα διώκων</i><!-- check this --> “Pursuing things that are false” (Johannes Chrysostomus). <i xml:lang="grc">Καὶ στολισμὸς ἀνδρὸς, καὶ γέλως, καὶ βῆμα ποδὸς ἀναγγέλλει περὶ αὐτοῦ</i> “Nay the habit of a man, or his laugh, or the step of his foot, will discover who he is,” as Basil speaks: and therefore greater things must do it more.</li>
<li>As that (word) <i xml:lang="grc">Βλιτρι</i>, <i>Blitri</i>, in Diogenes Laërtius in the life of Zeno, which word has no meaning at all.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Αἰγύπτιοι—τὰ πολλὰ πάντα ἔμπαλιν τοῖσι ἄλλοισι ἀνθρώποισι ἐστήσαντο ἤθεά τε καὶ νόμους, κτλ.</i> “The Egyptians—have established a great many laws and customs, quite contrary to those of other people.” (Herodotus)</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">המתפלל לא יצמור בתמלה …בראש מגולה—</i><!-- check this for accuracy --> “He that prays, must not have his head uncovered while he is praying.” (Maimonodes and others everywhere).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Θεὸν ὁμολογοῦσιν ἐιδέναι, τοῖς δὲ ἔργοις ἀρνοῦνται</i> “They profess to know God, but in works they deny him” (Epistle to Titus). And <i xml:lang="grc">τὸ ἔργοις ἀρνεῖσθαι Θεὸν ὐπερ τὸ εὶπεῦ ἐν στόματι</i><!-- probably wrong --> “To deny God by our works is worse than to deny him by our words” (Johannes Chrysostomus).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Λόγος ἔργου σκιή</i> “Words are the images of our deeds" (Plutarch). <i xml:lang="la">Res loquitur ipfa: quæ semper valet plurimum</i> &dquo;The thing speaks itself, which is always of very great force.” (Cicero) <i xml:lang="la">Quid verba audiam, cum facta videam?</i> &dlquo;What signifies my hearing of words, when I see the facts” (Ibid.). <i xml:lang="grc">Αὐτὰ βοᾷ τὰ πράγματα, κᾂν τῇ φωνῇ σιωπᾷς</i> “The facts themselves speak out aloud, though you are silent with your voice” (Basil of Caesarea).</li>
<li>This we know. For they are different to different nations; we coin them as we please, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> <i xml:lang="grc">φύσει τῶν ὀνομάτων οὐδέν ἐστιν, ἀλλ᾿ ὅταν γένηται σύμβολον</i> “The names of things are not founded in nature, but are only artificial signs” (Aristotle). And though Plato seems to be of another mind, yet when Cratylus says <i xml:lang="grc">Ονόματος ὀρθότητα εἶναι ἑκάστῳ τῶν ὄντων φύσει πεφυκυῖαν</i> “that the propriety of the name is founded in the nature of every thing,” it is as much to be questioned whether anything more be meant than this, that some names of things are more natural or proper than others. For he says that this rectitude of names is the same <i xml:lang="grc">καὶ Ἕλλησι καὶ βαρβάροις</i> “with the Greeks and with the Barbarians;” that it is [only] such as is sufficient <i xml:lang="grc">δηλοῦν οἷον ἕκαςτόν ἐςτι τῶν ὄντων,</i> “to signify what every thing is;” such as may render them <i xml:lang="grk">κατὰ τὸ δυνατὸν ὅμοια—τοῖς πράγμασιν</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr> “as like the things as is possible, <abbr>etc.</abbr>” That <i xml:lang="la">lepidum &amp; festivum argumentum,</i> “that witty and jocular argument,” which Publius Nigidius in Aulus Gellius makes use of to show, <i xml:lang="la">cur videri possint verba esse naturalia magis quam arbitraria,</i> “why words seem rather to be natural than arbitrary,” deserves only to be laughed at.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">רֵישׁ</i>, the Hebrew word <i>Resh</i>.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">רֵישׁ</i>, the Arabic word <i>Resh</i>. So Aben Ezra observes that <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">אבה</i>, Abab, in Hebrew is to <i>will</i>, in Arabic to <i>nill</i> (though in Arabic the word is written <i xml:lang="ar" dir="rtl">אבי</i> <i>Abi</i>): and in another place, that the <em>same</em> word even in the <em>same</em> language sometimes signifies <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">דבר והפכו</i>, a thing and its contrary. And everyone knows, that the greater part of our words have different senses and uses. The word <i xml:lang="ar" dir="rtl">עגוז</i><!-- ? --> <i>Gnigon</i> in Arabic, according to Giggeius and Golius, has 70 or 80, and some (two at least) contrary the one to the other.</li>
<li>This is <i xml:lang="grc">ποιεῖν ψεῦδος</i> “to act a lie” (<i>Revelation</i>). Plato uses the same way of speaking. <i xml:lang="grc">Ψεῦδος</i>, says he, <i xml:lang="grc">μηδεὶς μηδὲν—μήτε λόγῳ μήτε ἔργῳ πράξειεν</i> “No man should tell a lie either by word or deed.” The contrary to this is in Aristotle <i xml:lang="grk">ἀληθεύειν… ὁμόιως ἐν λόγοις καὶ πράξεσιν</i>; “to perform the truth both in words and  in deeds;” and <i xml:lang="grk">ἐν βίῳ ἀληθεύειν</i>, “to live in the truth.” And in S.B.<!-- Suffraganeus Bibliothece? --> <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">לכת באמת</i><!-- check -->, “to walk in the truth,” and <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">דרך אמת</i><!-- check --> “in the way of truth.”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la"><em>Actum</em> generale verbum est, sive <em>verbis</em> sive <em>re</em> quid agatur,”</i> “<em>An act</em> is a general expression, and signifies anything that is acted either by <em>words</em> or <em>deeds</em>” (Justinian, <i>Digest</i>).</li>
<li>As it must be, because <i sml:lang="grc">Ὀρθὸν ἡ ἀλήθεί ἀεί</i> “Truth is always right” (Soph<!--ocles?-->).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Τῷ λογικῷ ζώῳ ἡ ἀυτὴ πρᾶξις κατὰ φύσιν ἐστὶ καὶ κατὰ λόγον</i> “An action which is done according to nature, or according to reason, is the same in a creature endowed with reason” (That is, according to truth, which it is the office of reason to discover) (Marcus Aurelius). <i xml:lang="la">Nunquam aliud <em>natura</em>, aliud <em>sapientia</em> dicit</i> “<em>Nature</em> never dictates one thing, and <em>reason</em> a different thing” (Juvenal).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Ἔδωκεν [ὁ Θεὸς] ἀντὶ δέλτου τὸν κόσμον</i> “[God] has given us the world, as it were for a book to read in” (Johannes Chrysostomus).</li>
<li>What Hierocles says of his <i xml:lang="grc">ἐγκόσμιοι Θεοὶ</i> “Gods that govern this world,” is true in respect of every thing. <i xml:lang="grc">Τῷ Θέιῳ νόμῳ κατακολουθούντων ἐστί—τοῦτο ἀυτοὺς εἶναι τίθεσθαι, δ γεγόνασι</i> “The supposing them to be what they are—is paying obedience to the law of God.” There is a passage somewhere in <i>Sefer ha-Ikkarim</i>. much like this: where it is said (as I remember) that he, who worships an Angel <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">מצר מה הוא שליח ה</i><!-- check --> (“as being what he is, the messenger of God”) is not guilty of idolatry.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">הקב״ה נקרא אמת <abbr class="eoc">וכו׳</abbr></i><!-- check --> “The holy Being is called truth.” In <i>Reshit Hohkmah</i><!-- ?? --> and others. And St. Chrysostom defines truth in the same words, which philosophers apply to the Deity.  <i xml:lang="grc">Ἀλήθεια τὸ ὄντως ὄν</i> “Truth is that which has a real existence.”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Ἀλήθεια γὰρ ὀπαδὸς θεοῦ</i> “For truth is the companion of God” (Philonis, <i>Judaei</i>).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Ποιμνας… ὡς ἄνδρας… ἔχων</i> “Treating his flocks… like men,” is in Sophocles the character of Ajax, when his head was turned, in a fit of raving. And among the monstrous and mad extravagances of Caesar Caligula one is, that he treated his horse Incitatus as a man (Suetonius).</li>
<li>Horace argues after the same manner. <i xml:lang="la">Si quis lectica nitidam gestare amet <em>agnam</em>; Huic vestem, ut <em>gnatæ</em>, paret, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>… Interdicto huic omne adimat ius Prætor, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>… Quid? si quis <em>gnatam</em> pro mutâ devovet <em>agnâ Integer est animi? Ne dixeris.</em></i> “If any one should take pleasure in carrying a very pretty lamb about with him in his chariot, and clad it like his daughter; <abbr>etc.</abbr> ought not the magistrate to take the power out of such a one’s hands? <abbr>etc.</abbr> But what if any man should attempt to offer his daughter as a sacrifice instead of a dumb lamb, Would you say that he was in his right senses? I am sure you would not.” If it be against truth and nature to use a lamb as a daughter, it will be as much against truth to use a daughter as a lamb.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Καθ᾿ αὑτο… μὲν ψεῦδος φαῦλον καὶ ψεκτόν τὸ δ᾽ αληθει καλὸν καὶ ἐπαινετόν</i> “A lie is base and blameworthy of itself, and truth is beautiful and praiseworthy” (Aristotle). <i xml:lang="la">Est quiddam, quod suâ vi nos alliciat ad sese, non emolumento captans aliquo, sed trahens sua dignitate; quod genus, virtus, scientia, <em>veritas</em> est</i> “There is something that wins our affections by its own native force, something that does not catch us by any profit that it brings, but attracts us by its superior execellency; something of this kind is virtue, knowledge, <em>truth</em>” (Cicero). “Truth is a sweet thing” (A festival saying in Plutarch).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">O magna vis veritatis, <abbr>etc.</abbr></i> “O the great force of truth, <abbr>etc.</abbr> (Cicero). A good man <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">עושה האמת מפני שהוא אמת</i> “does the truth, because it is the truth” (Maimonides).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Plura vera discrepantia esse non possunt</i> “Be there never so many truths, they cannot be inconsistent with each other” (Cicero).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Oblivione voluntaria</i> &“By a voluntary forgetfulness” (Cicero).</li>
<li>In the Civil Law he is said to act, who does omit. <i xml:lang="la">Qui <em>non facit</em> quod facere debet, videtur <em>facere</em> adversus ea qua non facit</i> (<i xml:lang="la">Digestorum, seu Pandectarum</i>).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Est quodam prodire tenus</i> “It is something to go, though it be but a little way, or to make a small progress” (Horace).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Disces quamdiu voles: tamdiu autem velle debebis quoad te, quantum proficias, non pœnitebit</i> “You may learn as long as you please, and you ought to please, so long as you are not uneasy at any improvement of yourself,” says Cicero to his son.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Nulla virtus virtuti contraria est</i> “No one virtue can be contradictory to any other virtue” (Seneca).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">עגי באותה שעה</i> “Poor at that particular time 3" according to that determination in a case something like this, which occurs in Talm. Mass. Phe.<!-- ?? --></li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Utrique simul consulendum est. Dabo egenti; sed ut <em>ipse</em> non egeam, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “Regard is to be had to both at the same time; I will give to one in want, yet so that I may not want <em>myself</em>, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>” (Seneca).  <i xml:lang="la">Ita te aliorum miserescat, ne tui alios misereat</i> “Take pity of others, but do it in such a manner as not to stand in need of the pity of others yourself” (Plautus).</li>
<li>Sextus Empiricus seems to be fond of that filthy saying of Zeno, in relation to what is storied of Jocasta and Oedipus: <i xml:lang="grc">μὴ ἄτοπον εἶναι τὸ μόρίον τῆς μητρὸς… τρῖψαι, <abbr>κλ</abbr></i> any more, than to rub with the hand any other part of her, when in pain. Here only <i xml:lang="grc">τρίψις</i> is considered; as if all was nothing more, but <em>barely</em> <i xml:lang="grc">τρίψις</i>; but this is an incomplete idea of the act. For <i xml:lang="grc">τρίψις τοῦ μόρίον</i> is more than <i xml:lang="grc">τρίψις</i> by itself: and <i xml:lang="grc">τρίψις τοῦ μόρίον τῆς μητρὸς</i> is still more: and certainly <i xml:lang="grc">τρίβειν τὴν χεῖρα τῇ χειρὶ</i> is a different thing from <i xml:lang="grc">τρίβειν τὸ μορίον τῷ μορίῳ</i>, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> He might as well have said, that to rub a red hot piece of iron with one’s bare hand is the same as to rub one that is cold, or any other innocent piece of matter: for all is but <i xml:lang="grc">τρίψις</i>. Thus men, affecting to appear freethinkers, show themselves to be but half-thinkers, or less: they do not take in the whole of that which is to be considered.</li><!-- double check all this greek -->
<li><i xml:lang="la">Sunt res quædam ex tempore, &amp; ex consilio, non ex sua natura considerandæ… Quid tempora petant, aut quid personis dignum sit, considerandum est, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “Some things are to be considered, not as they are in their own nature, but the particular time and the intention are to be taken into the account… We are to consider what the times require, and what is proper-for such and such persons, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>” (Cicero).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Οὐ λέγεις φιλόπονον τόν διά παιδισκάριον ἀγρυπνοῦντα</i> “You will not say that a person is industrious, because he once watched all night with his daughter” (Arrian). <i xml:lang="la">Amico ægro aliquis assidet: probamus. At hoc si hereditatis causâ facit, vultur est, cadaver expectat</i> “A man watches with a sick friend: it is allowed to be a good action; but if he did it in order to make himself his heir, he is a vulture, and watched for the carcass” (Seneca).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Οὐ γὰρ εἷς ἀρνήσεώς ἐστι τρόπος</i> “There are more ways than one of denying a thing” (Johannes Chrysostomus).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Τὸ κράτιστον τῶν ἁγαθῶν, ἡ ἀλήθεια, καὶ ὁ ἔσχατος ὅρος τῆς πονηρίας, τὸ ψεῦδος</i> “Of all the good things in the world truth is the best, and falsehood is the utmost boundary of all evil” (Basil).</li>
<li>Notwithstanding that paradox of the Stoics, <i xml:lang="grc">Ὅτι ἴσα τὰ ἁμαρτήματα, καὶ τὰ κατορθώματα</i> “That all sins are equal, and all duties equal,” in Cicero, Plutarch, Diogenes Laërtius, and others, which might easily be confuted from their own words in Cicero. For if sinning be like passing a line, or limit; that is, going over or beyond that line: then, to sin being equal to going beyond that line, to go more (or farther) beyond that line must be to sin more. Who sees not the falsity of that, <i xml:lang="la">nec bono viro meliorem… nec forti fortiorem, nec sapiente sapientiorem posse fieri</i> “that it is impossible for a good man to be better… or a strong man to be stronger, or awise man wiser?” And so on. <i xml:lang="la">Nullum inter scelus &amp; erratum discrimen facere</i>, “to make no difference betwixt notorious wickedness and mere mistakes” (as <abbr>St.</abbr> Jerome expresses their opinion: if that epistle to Celantia be his) is to alter or destroy the natures of things.</li>
<li>Sure that Wiseman was but a bad accountant, who reckoned, <i xml:lang="grc">τὴν μεγίστην οὐσίαν ἀποβάλὼν, δραχμὴν μίαν ἐκβεβληκέναι</i> “that he who throws away the greatest estate, throws away but a drachm” (In Plutarch).</li>
<li>This is confessed in Cicero. <i xml:lang="la">Illud interest, quod in servo necando, si adsit injuria, semel peccatur: in patris vita violanda multa peccantur, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Multitudine peccatorum præstat, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “There is this difference, that he who kills a slave, if it be done wrongfully, is guilty of sin in that one respect only; but he that wickedly takes away the life of his father, sins in many respects, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> He excels in the multitude of his sins, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>”</li>
<li>This may serve for an answer to Chrysippus, and them who say, <i xml:lang="grc">εἰ ἀληθὲς ἀληθοῦς μᾶλλον οὐκ ἔστιν, οὐδὲ ψεῦδος ψεύδους· οὕτως οὐδὲ ἀπάτη ἀπάτης, οὐδὲ ἁμάρτημα ἁμαρτήματος, <abbr>κλ</abbr></i> “That if no one truth be greater than another truth, nor no one falsehood greater than another falsehood; then neither is one fraud nor one sin greater than another” (in Diogenes Laërtius).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Queis paria esse ferè placuit peccata, laborant Cùm ventum ad verum est: sensus moresque repugnant, Atque ipsa utilitas</i> “They who would have all sins to be equal, labor under great difficulty, when they come to the truth; for they find it contrary to reason, to morality, and to the interest of mankind” (Horace).</li>
<li>Therefore they, who denied there was either good or evil (<i xml:lang="grc">Φύσει ἀγαθὸν καὶ κακόν</i> “good or evil in the nature of things”) were much in the right to make thorough work, and to say there was nothing in nature either true or false. See Sextus Empiricus and Diogenes Laërtius.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Quod [extremum, et ultimum bonorum] omnium philosophorum sententiâ tale debet esse, ut ad id omnia referri oporteat: ipsum autem nusquam</i> “That which is the [ultimate end or final good] according to the opinion of all philosophers, must be something to which all other things ought to be referred, but itself referred to nothing” (Cicero).</li>
<li>There was among the old philosophers such an uncertainty and variety of opinions concerning the <i xml:lang="la">fines bonorum &amp; malorum</i>, “the limits of good and evil,“that if Varro computes rightly, the number might be raised to 288 (<abbr>St.</abbr> Augustine).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Quod honestum est, id bonum solum habendum est</i> “That which is truly honorable, and valuable upon its own account, is the only thing that ought to be esteemed really good” (Cato in Cicero).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Qui [omnes] permulta ob eam unam <em>causam</em> faciunt… quia honestum est</i> “Who [everybody] do abundance of things for this reason only… because they are honorable in themselves” (Cicero).</li>
<li>It is commonly placed among ends: and is considered as such in those ways of speaking; <i xml:lang="la">honestum esse propter se expetendum</i> “that which is honorable ought to be sought after for its own sake” (Cicero). <i xml:lang="la"><em>Finem</em> bonorum esse honestè vivere</i> “<em>The perfection</em> of all goodness and virtue is to live by the rules of true honor” (<abbr xml:lang="la">ibid.</abbr> and the like).</li>
<li>To say <i xml:lang="la">Quod laudabile est, omne honestum est</i> “what is truly praiseworthy, is truly honorable,” or anything like that, is, to say nothing. For how shall one know what is truly <i xml:lang="la">laudabile</i>, “praiseworthy?”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Τέλος εἶπε [Ζήνων] τὸ ὁμολογουμένως (</i><abbr xml:lang="la">al.</abbr> <i xml:lang="grc">ἀκολούθως) τῇ φύσει ζῆν, ὅπερ ἐστὶ κατ' ἀρετὴν ζῆν· Ἄγει γὰρ πρὸς ταύτην ἡμᾶς ἡ φύσις</i> “The perfection of man says (Zeno) is to live agreeably to, or to follow nature; and that is to live virtuously, for nature leads us to that” (Diogenes Laërtius).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Vivere ex hominis naturâ</i> “To live agreeably to the nature of man” (Cicero). It is true he adds, <i xml:lang="la">undique perfectâ &amp; nihil requirente</i>: “every way perfect and wanting nothing” but those words have either no meaning, or such as will not much mend the matter. For what is <i xml:lang="la">natura undique perfecta &amp; nihil requirens</i> “a nature every way perfect and wanting nothing?” Beside, moral religion does not consist in following nature already perfect, but by the practice of religion we aim at the perfecting of our natures.</li>
<li>Celebrated everywhere.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Τό μέν ούν ούτω διορίσασθαι τὰς οὶγαθὰς πράξεις, τὰς κατα τὸν δρθόν γινομένας λόγον, τὰς πονηρὰς τοὐναντίον, ἀληθὲς μέν, οὐκ ἔστι δὲ ίκανὸν τὰς πράξεις σημᾶναι</i><!-- double check --> “To define good actions thus, <abbr xml:lang="la">viz.</abbr> that they are done according to right reason, and bad, actions the contrary; is indeed true, but is not sufficient to declare the nature of them by showing what actions are truly such” (Andronicus of Rhodes).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Nec solum jus &amp; injuria a natura dijudicatur, sed omnino omnia honesta &amp; turpia. Nam communis intelligentia nobis notas res efficit easque in animis nostris inchoavit, ut honesta in virtute ponantur, in vitiis turpia</i> “Not only right and wrong are different in the nature of things, but all sorts of honorable and base actions are so likewise: for common sense makes us understand things, and lays the first rudiments of them in our minds, in such a manner, that we make honorable things to consist in their being virtuous, and base things to consist in their being vicious” (Cicero). <i xml:lang="grc">Κριτήριά φησιν [ὁ Χρύσιππος] εἶναι αἴσθησιν καὶ πρόληψιν</i> “Chrysippus says, that sensation and reflection are the rules by which we form our judgment of things” (Diogenes Laërtius).</li>
<li>They are usually called <i xml:lang="la">principia naturæ, lex</i> (or <i xml:lang="la">leges</i>) <i xml:lang="la">naturæ</i>, <i xml:lang="grc">προλήψειςm κοιναὶ</i>, or <i xml:lang="grc">φυσικαὶ ἔννοιαιm, νόμος φυσικὸς</i>, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> “the principles of nature, the law (or laws) of nature, first apprehensions of things, universal or natural notions, the law of nature, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>”</li><!-- double-check this greek -->
<li>The set of these practical principles (or a habit flowing from them) is, what, I think, goes by the name of <i xml:lang="la">Synteresis</i>.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Unaquæque gens hoc legem naturæ putat, quod didicit</i> “Every nation think that to be the law of nature, which they have been taught” (<abbr>St.</abbr> Jerome).</li>
<li>Under which word these delicate men comprehend <em>labor</em>. When Epicurus, in Lucian, is asked, <i xml:lang="la">Κακὸν ἡγῇ τὸν πόνον</i> “Whether he thought labor an evil?” he answers, <i xml:lang="la">Ναί</i> “Yea.” And Mindyrides (<i xml:lang="grc">Σμενδυρίδης</i>, <abbr>ap.</bbr> Herodotus. <i xml:lang="grc">ὃς ἐπὶ πλεῖστον δὴ χλιδῆς εἷς ἀνὴρ ἀπίκετο</i> “Smyndirides, it is in Herodotus, a man who carried luxury to the highest degree”) proceeded so far in his aversion to labor, that <i xml:lang="la">ejus latus <em>alieno labore</em> condoluit… qui cum vidisset fodientem, &amp; altiùs rastrum allevantem, lassum se fieri (</i><i xml:lang="grc">ῥῆγμα λαβεῖν<i xml:lang="la"> in Athenæus) questus vetuit illum opus in conspectu suo facere</i> “it gave him a pain in his side <em>to see another man labor</em>…: when he saw anyone digging or lifting a heavy rake, he complained that it made him weary (“demolished him,” it is in Athenæus) and forbade the person doing any more work in his sight” (Seneca).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Ad hæc [voluptatem, &amp; dolorem] &amp; quæ sequamur, &amp; quæ fugiamus, refert omnia [Aristippus]</i> “(Aristippus) referred everything (to pleasure and pain) which we pursue or avoid” (Cicero).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Velim definias, quid sit voluptas: de quo omnis hæc quæstio est</i> “I would have you define what pleasure is, for this whole question is about that” (Cicero). The disputes about pleasure between the Cyrenaics, Epicurus, Hieronymus, <abbr>etc.</abbr> are well known: whether the end was pleasure of body or mind: whether it was <i xml:lang="la">voluptas in motu</i>, or <i xml:lang="la">in statu (stabilitate); quae suavitate aliqua naturam ipsam movet</i>, or <i xml:lang="la">quae percipitur, omni dolore detracto</i>; <i xml:lang="grc">ἠ ἐν κινήσει</i>, or <i xml:lang="grc">ἠ καταστηματικὴ</i> <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> (Cicero, Diogenes Laërtius, <abbr>et al.</abbr>).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Negat Epicurus jucundè vivi posse, nisi cum virtute vivatur</i> “Epicurus denies that anyone can live pleasantly, that does not live virtuously” (Cicero). But for all that their pleasures have not continued to be always like those in the little gardens of Gargettus. Nor indeed do they seem to be very virtuous even there. For Epicurus not only had his Leontium (or, as he amorously called her, <i xml:lang="grc">Λεοντάριον</i>, “his pretty poppet”) a famous harlot; but she <i xml:lang="grc">πᾶσί τε τοῖς Επικουρείοις συνήν ἐν τοῖς κήποις</i> “laid with all the Epicureans in the gardens” (Athenaeus). And in his book <i xml:lang="grk">περὶ τέλους</i> “of perfection” he is said to have written thus, <i xml:lang="grk">Οὐ γὰρ ἔγωγε ἔχω τί νοήσω τἀγαθόν, ἀφαιρῶν μὲν τὰς διὰ χυλῶν</i> (<i xml:lang="grc">χειλῶν</i> Athenaeus) <i xml:lang="grc">ἡδονάς, ἀφαιρῶν δὲ καὶ τὰς δι᾿ ἀφροδισίων, <abbr>κλ</abbr></i> “There is nothing that I esteem good, if you take away the pleasure which arises from eating and drinking and women” (see this and more in Diogenes Laërtius).</li>
<li><abbr>St.</abbr> Jerome uses the plural number, as if this was the prevailing notion in his time. <i xml:lang="la">Philosophorum sententia est</i>, <i xml:lang="grc">μεσότητας ἀρετὰς, ὑπερβολὰς κακίας εἶναι</i> “It is the opinion of the philosophers, that virtues consist in the middle, and vices in the extremes.”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Ἡ μὲν ὑπερβολὴ ἁμαρτάνεται, ἁμαρτάνεταικαὶ ἡ ἔλλειψις ψέγεται, τὸ δὲ μέσον ἐπαινεῖται… Ἔστιν ἄρα ἡ ἀρετὴ ἕξις προαιρετική ἐν μεσότητι οὖσα, κτλ.… Μεσότης δὲ δύο κακιῶν, τῆς μὲν καθ᾿ ὑπερβολὴν τῆς δὲ κατ᾿ ἔλλειψιν</i> “Every excess is a crime, and every defect is blameworthy, but the medium is commendable.… Virtue then is a habit of our own procuring, and consists in the middle.… Which middle is between the two extremes; the one of excess, and the other of defect” (Aristotle). Perhaps Pythagoras (and after him Plato, and others) when he said (in Diogenes Laërtius) <i xml:lang="grc">τήν ἀρετὴν ἁρμονίαν εἷναι</i> “that virtue was a kind of harmony," might have some such thought as this.</li>
<li>When he says, it must be taken <i xml:lang="grc">ὁύτως ὡς ἂν ὁ ὀρθὸς λόγος προστάξῃ</i> “according to the direction of right reason,” it is not by that acertained. See before.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Οὐ γὰρ ῥᾴδιον διορίσαι τὸ πῶς καὶ τίσι, <abbr>κλ</abbr></i> “It is not easy to determine the particular manner and the particular persons.” Therefore Rabbi Albo might have spared that censure, where he blames himself for expressing himself too generally, when he says, <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">כמו שראוי יבעת הראוי ובמקוס הראוי</i> “after a due manner, in a convenient time, and in proper place,” without telling him what that manner, time, place is.</li>
<li>That man, says he, cannot be neglected, who endeavors <i xml:lang="grc">δίκαιος γίγνεσθαι, καὶ ἐπιτηδεύων ἀρετὴν, ἐις ὅσον δυνατὸν ἀνθρώπῳ ὁμοιοῦσθαι θεῷ</i> “to make himself a righteous man, by laboring after virtue, that he may be as like God as it is possible for a man to be.” And in another place, our <i xml:lang="grc">φυγὴ ἐνθένδε</i> is <i xml:lang="grc">ὁμοίωσις θεῷ κατὰ τὸ δυνατόν</i> “fleeing from thence is being like unto God so far as we can be.” <abbr>St.</abbr> Augustine seems to agree with him, in that sentence of his, <i xml:lang="la">Religionis summa est imitari quem colis</i> “The highest pitch of religion is to imitate the being you worship.”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Πυθαγόρας ἐρωτηθεὶς τὶ ποιοῦσιν ἄνθρωποι θεῷ ὅμοιοv, ἔφη, Ἐὰν άληθεύωσι</i> “Pythagoras being asked, what it was that any man could do like what God does, answered: Speak the truth.” (Joannes Stobaeus)</li>
<li>There is certainly not that difficulty or perplexity in morality, which Cicero seems to suppose, when he says, <i xml:lang="la">Consuetudo exercitatioque capienda, ut boni ratiocinatores officiorum esse possimus</i> “That use and exercise are necessary to make us good reasoners about what is our duty.”</li>
<li>What it is in nature. <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">כפי מה שהואבוא</i> “according to what the thing is,” to use Maimonides’s words. And thus that in Arrianus is true, <i xml:lang="grc">Νόμος βιωτικός ἐστιν ούτος, το ἀκόλουθον τῇ φύσει πράττειν</i> “The rule of life is, to do whatever is agreeable to nature.” <i xml:lang="la">Omni in re quid sit veri, videre &amp; tueri decet</i> “We ought to find out and to maintain what is true, about every thing” (Cicero). This is indeed the way of truth.</li>
<li>Because there is scarce anything, which one or other will not say. <i xml:lang="la">Quid enim dici potest de illo, qui nigram dixit esse nivem, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “What can we say of a man that affirms black to be white, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>” (Lactantius).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Conveniet cùm in dando munificum esse, tum in exigendo non acerbum:… à litibus verò quantùm liceat, &amp; nescio an paulo plus etiam quàm liceat, abhorrentem.… Habenda autem est ratio rei familiaris, quam quidem dilabi finere flagitiosum est</i> “It is but reasonable that we should be liberal in giving, and not severe in our demands:… we should be averse to any contention, as far as is lawful, nay I don’t know, if we should not go a little farther.… But we must have regard to our own private circumstances, for it is a wicked thing in us to hurt them” (Cicero).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Τὸν φιλέοντ᾿ ἐπὶ δαῖτα καλεῖν, τον δ᾿ έχθρὸν ἐᾶσαι</i> “Invite your friend to supper, but let your enemy alone” (Hesiod).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Τὸ πένεσθαι οὐκ ὀμολογεῖν τινὶ αἰσχρόν, ἀλλὰ μὴ διαφεύγειν ἔργῳ αἴσχιον</i> “For a poor man not to own himself to be poor is a base thing; but for him not to endeavor to be otherwise is a baser thing still” (Thucydides).</li>
<li>For <i xml:lang="grc">ἔργον δ᾿ οὐδὲν ὄνειδος</i> “no endeavor is any reproach” (Hesiod).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Suum cuique incommodum ferendum est potius, quam de alterius commodis detrahendum</i> “Every man ought to bear the evils he is under, rather than deprive others of their advantages” (Cicero). According to Plato, a man should choose to die, <i xml:lang="la">πρὸ τοῦ ἀδικεῖν</i> “rather than do an unjust thing.”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grk">Οὕτω καὶ ἰατρὸς νοσοῦντα ἐξαπατᾷ,… καὶ δεινὸν οὐδέν</i> “Thus a physician deceives a sick person,… and there is nothing shocking in it” (Maxime de Tyr).</li>
<li>To that question, <i xml:lang="la">Si quis ad te confugiat, qui mendacio tuo possit à morte liberari, non es mentiturus?</i> “If a man should come to you, who should be saved from death by your telling a lie, would you tell one?” <abbr>St.</abbr> Augustine answers in the negative, and concludes, <i xml:lang="la">Restat ut nunquam boni mentiantur.… Quanto fortiùs, quanto excellentiùs dices, nec prodam, nec mentiar</i> “It remains then that good men should never tell a lie.… How much more courageous, how much better is it to say, I will neither betray him, nor tell a lie.”</li>
<li>In such pressing cases, under imminent danger, the world is wont to make great allowances. <i xml:lang="grc">Οὐκ αἰσχρὸν ἡγῇ δῆτα τὰ ψευδῆ λέγειν;… Οὐκ, ἐι τὸ σωθῆναί γε τὸ ψεῦδος φέρει</i> “Is it not then a base thing to say what is false?… No, not if the falsity will save anyone” (Sophocles). Even they, who say, <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">השח שיחה בטלה עובר במעשה</i><!-- check --> “that he who speaks falsehood transgresses indeed” and, <i xml:lang="he" dir="rl">עשה לדבר אמת אפילו במילי דעלמא</i> “that it is a positive precept to speak the truth in common discourse;” and, <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">חמשקר כאלו עובד ע״ז</i> “that a liar is like an idolater;” say also, <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">אבל לשיס שלוס מזתר</i><!-- check --> “that it is better to preserve peace” (S. Hhared &amp; al. pass.)<!-- ??? --> And Aben Ezra says of Abraham, <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">דחה אבימלך בדבריס כפי עורך השעה</i><!-- check --> “that he urged Abimelech with such words as the necessity of that time required.” In short, some have permitted, in desperate cases, <i xml:lang="la">mendacio tanquam veneno uti</i>, “to make use of a lie as you do of poison” (Sextus the Pythogorean).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">אסור …לשבר כליו בחמתו <abbr class="eoc">וכו׳</abbr></i> “It is forbidden… to break your own vessels in your anger” (Sefer Hasidim).</li>
<li>Who does not detest that thought of Caligula, <i xml:lang="la">de Homeri carminibus abolendis, <abbr>etc.</abbr></i>? about destroying Homer’s verses, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> (Suetonius).</li>
<li>The Stoics must certainly therefore be much too scrupulous, when they affirm (if they were in earnest), that <i xml:lang="grc">οὐδὲ τὸν δάκτυλον ὡς ἔτυχε σαλεύειν τῷ σοφῷ ὁ λόγος ἐπιτρέπει</i> “reason commands a wise man, not so much as to move his fingers, as it were by chance” (Clemens Alexandrinus). Especially since this is at least ordinarily, a thing perfectly indifferent by <a href="#prop9">proposition IX</a>.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Tu si hic sis, aliter sentias</i> “You would be of another opinion, if you were in my circumstances” (Terence).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Felicitas cui præcipua fuerit homini, non est humani judicii: cùm prosperitatem ipsam alius alio modo, &amp; suopte ingenio quisque terminet</i> “No man can judge what the happiness of another man consists in; because some make their happiness to consist in one thing, and some in another, according to their several dispositions” (Pliny, the elder).</li>
<li>It is not possible, in Albo’s words, <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">לתת לאיש כדרכיו שוה בשוה ולשער העונשים במדה במשקל <abbr class="eoc">וכו׳</abbr></i> “to give to every man according to equity, with regard to his ways, and to estimate punishments by measure and weight.”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Inter hominem &amp; belluam hoc maximè interest, quod hæc… ad id solum quod adest, quodque præsens est, se accommodat, paululum admodum sentiens præteritum aut futurum, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “Herein lies the chief difference between a man and a beast, that this latter conforms itself to that only which is present and before it, having but a very small sense of what is past or to come <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>” (Cicero).
</li>
<i xml:lang="la">Nos &amp; venturo torquemur &amp; præterito. Timoris enim tormentum memoria reducit, providentia anticipat. Nemo tantum præsentibus miser est.</i> “But we torment ourselves with what is to come, and with what is past: for by our foresight we anticipate the torment of fear, and by our memory we bring back that torment which is past. No man is miserable by the present things alone.” (Seneca)</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Præsens tempus brevissimum est, adeo quidem, ut quibusdam nullum videatur, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “The present time is as short as is possible, insomuch that some have imagined it to be a mere nothing, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>” (Seneca). <i xml:lang="grc">ὅταν γὰρ μηδὲν αὐτοὶ μεταβάλλωμεν τὴν διάνοιαν, ἢ λάθωμεν μεταβάλλοντες, οὐ δοκεῖ ἡμῖν γεγονέναι χρόνος</i> “When we have no succession of thoughts, or if we have, but forget them, then time seems to us to be nothing” (Aristotle).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">אין השם חפץ שתמות בהמה הגם <abbr class="eoc">וכו׳</abbr></i> “God takes no delight that a beast should die, if there be no reason for its dying” (Aben Ezra). <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">עושה עץר לבהמה תנס… בא לריך וכו׳</i><!-- probably wrongly transcribed --> “He that put a beast to any pain, without a just reason for so doing, shall be accountable for it” (Sefer Hhasidim).</li>
<li>The rants of those men, who assert, <i xml:lang="grc">μὴ διαφέρειν ἡδονῆν ἡδονῆς, μηδὲ ἥδεῖον τι εἶναι</i> “that there is no difference in pleasures, that nothing can be more than pleasant,” nay, <i xml:lang="grc">Φύσει οὐδὲν ἡδὺ, ἢ ἀηδὲς</i> “that there is nothing that is naturally pleasant or unpleasant,” in Diogenes Laërtius, can surely affect nobody, who has sense, or is alive. Nor that of the Stoics, in Plutarch, <i xml:lang="grc">ὅτι ἀγαθὸ ὁ χρόνος οὐκ αὔξει προσγιγνόμενος, <abbr>κτλ</abbr></i> “That the continuance of any good makes no addition to it.” As if an age was not more than a moment, and (therefore) an age’s happiness more than a moment’s.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Nocet (fit noxa) empta dolore voluptas</i> “Pleasure, that is procured by pain, is so much real hurt” (Horace). And, <i xml:lang="la">multo corrupta dolore voluptas</i> “Pleafure vitiated by much pain” (<abbr>ibid.</abbr>).</li>
<li>As when that Pompey, mentioned by Valerius Maximus, by burning his finger escaped the torture.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Bona malis paria non sunt, etiam pari numero: nec lætitia ulla minimo mœrore pensanda</i> “Good things are not equal to evil things, though they were the same in number; nor is any joy an equivalent for the least sorrow” (Pliny, the elder)</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Οἰόμεθά τε δεῖν ἡδονὴν παραμεμῖχθαι τῇ εὐδαιμονίᾳ</i> “We think that happiness must have some pleasure mixed with it” (Aristotle).</li>
<li>Or <i xml:lang="grc">ὁιονεὶ καθεύδοντός κατάστασις</i> “like a man in a deep sleep” (Aristippus, in Diogenes Laërtius).</li>
<li>This is truly <i xml:lang="la">Bonnum summum, quò tendimus omnes</i> “the chief good, which we all aim at” (Lucretius). <i xml:lang="grc">Ἃπαντα γὰρ ὡς ἐιπεῖν, ἑτέρου χάριν αἱρόυμεθα, πλὴν τῆς ὲυδαιμονίας τέλος γὰρ αὕτη</i><!-- double-check --> “We choose all other things, except happiness, for the sake of something else; but that is itself the end” (Aristotle).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Non dat Deus beneficia. Unde ergo quæ possides? quae…</i> “God does not give us any good things, whence then comes all that we have? which…” (Seneca).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Παντὶ τὸ παρὰ φύσιν αὐτοῦ κακία καὶ κακοδαιμονία ἐστίν</i> “Everything that is contrary to the nature of any being, is evil and misery to it.” (Arrian)
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Τίνων ἡδονῶν καὶ κατὰ λόγον ὀρθὸν μεταλαμβάνομεν</i><!-- couldn't find this quote --> “There are some pleasures which we claim by the dictates of right reason” (Simpl.)<!-- ?? --> <i xml:lang="la">Rectè facit, animo quando obsequitur suo: quod omnes homines facere oportet, dum id modo fiat bono</i> “He does right, who follows the dictates of his own mind, as all men ought to do, if they do it in a proper manner” (Plautus).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Habebit philosophus amplas opes; sed nulli detractas <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “A philosopher would have large possessions, but then he would not have them taken from others, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>” (Seneca). Here he seems to confess the folly of the Stoics, who denied themselves many pleasures, that were honest and almost necessary; living in tubs, feeding upon raw herbs and water, going about in a sordid garment, with a rough beard, staff, and satchel, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Quid rectum sit, apparet: quid expediat, obscurum est: ita tamen, ut… dubitare non possimus, quin ea maximè conducant, quæ sunt rectissima</i> “It is very evident what right is; but it is very difficult to say what is expedient; but yet there can be no doubt, but that those things which are most right, are most conducive to our happiness” (Cicero).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Quis hoc statuit, quod æquum sit in Quinctium, id iniquum esse in Nævium?</i> “Who has decreed that what is equitable, with regard to Quinctius, should be unjust, with respect to Nævius?” (Cicero).</li>
<li>That question in Plato, <i xml:lang="grc">Τί ἄν τις ἔχοι τεκμήριον ἀποδεῖξαι, εἴ τις ἔροιτο νῦν οὕτως ἐν τῷ παρόντι, πότερον καθεύδομεν καὶ πάντα ἃ διανοούμεθα ὀνειρώττομεν, <abbr class="eoc">κτλ.</abbr></i> “If anyone should affirm, that all our thoughts are only mere dreams, and that we are now asleep, what demonstrative proof could be brought to the contrary?” may have place among the velitations of philosophers: but a man can scarce propose it seriously to himself. If he does, the answer will attend it.</li>
<li>=a.</li>
<li>=e.</li>
<li>=ae.</li>
<li>See Andr&eacue; Tacquet’s <i>Elementa Geometriæ</i> 1.5, page 3, Number XII. But the thing appears from the bare inspection of these quantities: b, ab, aeb, aeib, aeiob, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></li>
<li>If men in their inferences, or in comparing their ideas, do many times not actually make use of such maxims; yet the thing is really the same. For what these maxims express, the mind sees without taking notice of the words.</li>
<li>Under the word “reason” I comprehend the intuition of the truth of axioms. For certainly to discern the respect, which one term bears to another, and from thence to conclude the proposition necessarily true, is an act of reason, though performed quick, or perhaps all at once.</li>
<li>If many believed, according to Socrates (in Lucian) that <i xml:lang="grc">ὅσην ἔχει τὸ μέγεθος τοῦ κόσμου τὴν ὑπεροχὴν πρὸς τὸ Σωκράτους ἢ Χαιρεφῶντος εἶδος, τηλικοῦτον καὶ τὴν δύναμιν αὐτοῦ, καὶ τὴν φρόνησιν, καὶ διάνοιαν ἀνάλογον διαφέρειν τῆς περὶ ἡμᾶς διαθέσεως</i> “so much as the magnitude of the world exceeds the bulk of Socrates and Chærophon; so far are their powers, reason, and understanding beyond the capacity of one of us,” what may we think of the God of the world? Therefore Tully seems to express himself too boldly where he writes, <i xml:lang="la">Est… homini cum Deo rationis societas. Inter quos autem ratio, inter eosdem etiam recta ratio communis est</i> “That God and man are allied to each other by reason. And where reason is in common to any persons, right reason is so likewise.”</li>
<li>Upon this account it is, that I add the word “given” at the end of my description of reason.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Simplex &amp; nuda veritas est luculentior; quia satis ornata per se est: adeoque ornamentis extrinsecus additis fucata corrumpitur: mendacium verò specie placet alienâ, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “Pure and naked truth is so much the clearer, because it has ornaments enough of its own; and therefore, when it is daubed over with external additional ornaments, it is corrupted by them, so that a lie is therefore pleasing, because it appears in the shape that is not its own, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>” (Lactantius).</li>
<li>That way, which some Sceptics take to prove the inexistence of truth, has nothing in it, unless it be a contradiction. If anything, say they, is demonstrated to be true, how shall it be known, that that demonstration is true? <i xml:lang="grc">Εἰ ἐξ ἀποδείξεως, ζητηθήσεται πάλιν, πῶς ὅτι καὶ τοῦτο ἀληθές ἐστι, καὶ οὕτως εἰς ἄπειρον</i> “If by another demonstration, how shall we know that this is true? and so on forever" (Sextus Empiricus). Nor do I well comprehend <abbr>St.</abbr> Chrysostom’s meaning, when he says, <i xml:lang="grc">Τὸ λογισμοῖς ἀποδεχθέν, κᾄν ἀληθὲς ᾖ, οὐδέπω πληροφορίαν τῇ ψυχῇ παρέχει καὶ πίστιν ἱκανήν</i> “That what is demonstrated by reasoning, though it may indeed be true, yet it does not afford sufficient proof or conviction to the mind.” For as no man truly believes anything, unless he has a reason for believing it: so no reason can be stronger than demonstration.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Haud alio fidei proniore lapsu, quàm ubi falsæ rei gravis autor existit</i> “Men being never more easily drawn into a wrong belief, than when the author of a falsity is a grave person” (Pliny, the elder).</li>
<li>That manner of demonstration, in which it has been pretended truth is deduced directly from that which is false, is only a way of showing, that an assertion is true, because its contradictory is false; founded in that known rule, <i xml:lang=la">Contradictoriæ nec simul veræ, nec simul falsæ esse possunt, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “That contradictory propositions can neither be true at the same time, nor false at the same time, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Cujus [summi rectoris &amp; domini] ad naturam apta ratio vera illa &amp; summa lex à philosophis dicitur</i> “The reason (of the supreme lord and governor) which is accommodated to the nature of things, is, by philosophers, called the true and chief law” (Cicero). <i xml:lang="grc">Νόμος ἀψευδὴς ὁ ὀρθὸς λόγος, οὐχ ὑπὸ τοῦ δεῖνος ἢ τοῦ δεῖνος, θνητοῦ φθαρτός, ἐν χαρτιδίοις ἢ στήλαις, ἄψυχος ἀψύχοις, ἀλλ᾿ ὑπ᾿ ἀθανάτου φύσεως ἄφθαρτος ἐν ἀθανάτῳ διανοίᾳ τυπωθείς</i> “Right reason is an unerring law, not to be defaced by any mortal man, as if it were a lifeless thing written upon paper or pillars which must decay: but it proceeds from an immortal being, and is itself immortal, and engraven on an immortal soul” (Philo Judaeus). More to this purpose might easily be collected.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Λόγος ἐστὶν ἐικὼν Θεοῦ</i> “reason is the image of God” (Philo Judaeus).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Τὸ ἡγεμονικὸν καὶ κυριεῦον τῆς ψυχῆς σου μέρος</i> “The governing part of the soul” (Marcus Aurelius). Or as it is in [Pseudo-]Plutarch, <i xml:lang="grc">τῆς ψυχῆς ἀνώτατον μέρος</i> “the supreme part of the soul.” <i xml:lang="la">Principatus</i>, “the principal part,” in Tully. <i xml:lang="la">Summus in anima gradus</i> (Tertullian).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Religio cogi non potest, verbis potiùs quàm verberibus res agenda est, ut sit voluntas</i> “Religion cannot be forced upon anyone, it must be done by words and not by blows, that it may be a thing of choice.” (Lactantius).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Natura etiam nullo docente profecta ab iis, quorum, ex prima &amp; inchoata intelligentia, genera cognovit, confirmat ipsa per se rationem, &amp; perficit</i> “For nature, without any teaching, proceeds upon those general truths which we are convinced of, as soon as we begin to have any understanding, and confirms and perfects them by reason” (Cicero).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Semina nobis scientiæ dedit [natura] scientiam non dedit</i> “The seeds or principles of knowledge are given us (by nature) but not knowledge itself” (Seneca).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Si sani sunt [sensus], &amp; valentes, &amp; omnia removentur, quæ obstant &amp; impediunt</i> “If (the senses) be sound and strong, and if everything be removed out of the way, that might obstruct or hinder them” (Cicero).</li>
<li>Socrates’s saying, in Cicero, <i xml:lang="la">nihil se scire, nisi id ipsum</i> “that he knew nothing but this,” <abbr xml:lang="la">viz.</abbr> that he knew nothing, savors of an affected humility, and must not be understood strictly. But they, who followed, went further (<i xml:lang="la">…omnes pæne veteres: qui nihil cognosci, nihil percipi, nihil sciri posse dixerunt</i>): (“…almost all the ancients, who affirmed, that nothing could be known, nothing perceived, nothing understood”): and particularly Arcefilas <i xml:lang="la">negabat esse quidquam quod sciri posset, <em>ne illud quidem ipsum</em>, quod Socrates sibi reliquisset</i> “Arcefilas denied that anything could be certainly known, <em>not so much as that</em>, which Socrates reserved to himself.” And thus the absurdity grew to a size, that was monstrous. For no man can act, or even be alive, if he knows nothing at all. Beside, to know, that one knows nothing, is a contradiction and not to know, that he knows even that, is not to know, whether he knows anything or not; and that is to know for ought he knows.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Nec scire fas est omnia</i> “Nor is it possible to know all things” (Horace).</li>
<li>This was the opinion of a wise man. <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">חגוך לגער על פי דרכו גם כי יזקין לא יסור ממנה</i> “Train up a child in the way that he should go; and when he is old, he will not depart from it” <i>Proverbs</i>. For <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">הלימוד בימי הנעות הוא כפתוח, על האבן… והלימוד בימי הוקגה כפתוח על החול</i><!-- check this... --> “learning in the days of youth, is like graving upon a stone… and learning, in the days of old age, is like marking upon the sand” (Qab. ven.)<!-- ??? -->. <i xml:lang="grc">Οὐ μικρὸν διαφέρει τὸ οὕτως ἢ οὕτως εὐθὺς ἐκ νέων ἐθίζεσθαι ἀλλὰ πάμπολυ, μᾶλλον δὲ τὸ πᾶν</i> “It is not a small but a very great advantage, or indeed all that can be, to be accustomed to such and such things from our very youth” (Aristotle).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Τετράκις ἔλεγον ἐξ ἠθέων τὸν ἥλιον ἀνατεῖλαι· ἔνθα τε νῦν καταδύεται, ενθεΰτεν δίς επαντεΤλαι, και ενθεν νΰν ανατελλει, ενθαΰτα δις καταδΰναι</i> “That the sun had risen four times contrary to what it usually does, <abbr xml:lang="la">viz.</abbr> risen twice where it now sets, and set twice, where it now rises.”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">עולם כמנהגו הולך</i><!-- check? --> “The world goes on in its usual course"</li><!-- Maimonides? no source given in WW -->
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">פתי יאמין לכל דבר</i> “A fool believes everything that he hears” (Proverbs) (which sure one may convert thus, <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">המאמין לכל דבר פתי הוא</i> “He that believes everything that he hears, is a fool.”)</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Statuere enim, qui sit sapiens, vel maximè videtur esse sapientis</i> “It seems requisite that a man must be himself wise, in order to determine who is a wise man” (Cicero).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Non numero hæc judicantur, sed pondere</i> “these are to be judged of, not by number, but by weight,” as Tully speaks upon another occasion. Therefore I cannot without a degree of indignation find a sort of writers pleasing themselves with having discovered some uncivilized nations, which have little or no knowledge of the Deity, <abbr>etc.</abbr> and then applying their observations to the service of atheism. As if ignorance could prove anything, or alter its nature by being general!</li>
<li>Aristotle’s known rule is <i xml:lang="grc">Ἔνδοξα, τὰ δοκοῦντα πᾶσιν, ἢ τοῖς πλείστοις, ἢ τοῖς σοφοῖς, καὶ τούτοις, ἢ τοῖς πᾶσιν, ἢ τοῖς πλείστοις, ἢ τοῖς μάλιστα γνωρίμοις καὶ ἐνδόξοις</i> “Those things are probable, which seem so to all men, or to most men, or to wise men: or which seem so to such as these, <abbr xml:lang="la">viz.</abbr> to all, or to a great many, or to the most knowing and those of the best reputation.” But it is not applicable to all cases.</li>
<li><i xml="grc">Δοκεῖ μοι χρῆναι παῤ ἀυτῶν [πρεσβυτῶν] πυνθάνεσθαι, ὥσπερ τινὰ ὁδὸν προεληλυθότων, ἣν καὶ ἡμᾶς ἴσως δεήσει πορεύεσθαι, ποία τίς ἐστι</i> “It seems best to enquire of old men, who have gone over the way that you are to go, what sort of away it is” (Plato).</li>
<li>When Sophocles, now grown old, was asked, <i xml:lang="grc">Πῶς ἔχεις πρὸς τ᾿ αφροδίσια</i> “What relish he had of women,” he answered, <i xml:lang="grc">Εὐφήμει, ὦ ἄνθρωπε ἀσμενέστατα μέν τοι αὐτὸ ἀπέφυγον, ὥσπερ λυττῶντά τινα καὶ ἄγριον δεσπότην ἀποφυγών.… παντάπασι γὰρ τῶν γε τοιούτων ἐν τῷ γήρᾳ πολλὴ εἰρήνη γίγνεται καὶ ἐλευθερία</i> “Be quiet, Sir. I flee from them as gladly as I would run away from a mad or a cruel master.… there is great ease and freedom from all such things when a man is grown old” (Plato, <abbr xml:lang="la">et al.</abbr>).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Ἐν βραχεῖ σφυρήλατον νοῦν περιεχούτα</i> “That contains solid sense in a small compass” (Plutarch).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Sicut <span xml:lang="grc">ἀμαθία μὲν θράσος, λογισμὸς δὲ ὄκνον φέρει</span> (è Thucydides) ita recta ingenia debilitat verecundia, perversa confirmat audacia</i> “As ignorance carries impudence along with it (out of Thucydides) and reputation makes men lazy; so modesty weakens great geniuses, and impatience confirms the obstinate” (Pliny, the younger).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Ὅταν τι βουλόμεθα ἀκριβὲς νοῆσαι, ἐις ἐρημίαν αποδιδράσκομεν, τὰς ὄψεις, τὰ ὦτα ἐπιφράττομεν, ἀποταττόμεθα ταῖς αισθήσεσι</i> “When we would consider a thing very exactly, we retire into some private place, we wink our eyes, and stop our ears, and renounce all our bodily senses” (Philo Judaeus).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Aliis nullus est deorum respectus, aliis pudendus</i> “Some do not worship the Gods at all, and others do it in a shameful manner” (Pliny, the elder). The former part of this observation is in truth the effect of the latter.</li>
<li><i xml lang="la">Pudet dicere frequentiam salutandi, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “I am ashamed to relate what sort of visits they make to each other, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>” (Jerome)</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Τὰ χρηστ᾿ ἐπιστάμεθα, καὶ γιγνώσκομεν, Οὐκ ἐκπονοῦμεν δ᾿ οἱ μὲν ἀργίας ὕπο, <abbr>κτλ.</abbr></i> “We know and understand what is good, but we do not labor after it; some out of laziness, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>” (Euripides)</li>
<li><i xml:lang="ar">פאת</i> “Fat” in Arabic is <i>to die</i>: and from hence the word <i xml:lang="la">fatum</i>, “fate," seems to come (as many Latin words do from that and other Eastern languages), death, if any thing, being fatal and necessary. Yet it does not follow, that therefore the time or manner of dying is unmoveably fixed. <i xml:lang="grc">Οὑ πάντα καθαρῶς οὐδὲ διαρρήδην ἡ εἱμαρμένη περιέχει, ἀλλ´ ὅσα καθόλου</i> “Fate does not contain in it all things clearly and distinctly, but only general things" (Plutarch). Chrysippus in Aulus Gellus seems to explain himself much after the same manner. The ancients moreover seem many times to make fate conditional. <i xml:lang="la">Similis si cura fuisset, Nec pater omnipotens Trojam, nec fata vetabant Stare, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “If the same care had been taken, neither Jupiter nor fate would have hindered Troy from standing at this time, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> (Virgil).</li>
<li>What the Pharisees say, according to Josephus, seems to be right. <i xml:lang="grc">Οἱ μὲν οὖν Φαρισαῖοι τινὰ καὶ οὐ πάντα τῆς εἱμαρμένης εἶναι λέγουσιν ἔργον, τινὰ δ᾿ ἐφ᾿ ἑαυτοῖς ὑπάρχειν, συμβαίνειν τε καὶ οὐ γίνεσθαι</i> “The Pharisees say some things, but not all, are the work of fate, for some are in our own power, and some may by accident not come to pass.” Rabbi Albo, in relation to human actions (and the consequent events), explains this opinion thus: <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">מקעתן בחיריות ומקעתן מגרחוח ומקעתן מעודבות מן ההגרח והבחירה וכו</i><!-- couldn't find anything like this --> “Some of them are perfectly free, some of them are forced, and some of them have a mixture of choice and force.” But for men to charge their own faults upon fate or fortune has been an old practice: <i xml:lang="grc">ἐθελοκακήσαντας… ἐπὶ τὴν κοινὴν ἐκείνην ἀπολογίαν, <abbr class="eoc">κτλ.</abbr></i> “voluntary evil-doers… have recourse to that common apology” (Lucian).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Dimidium dacti, qui cœpit, habet. Sapere aude.</i> “He that has made a good beginning, has half finished his work: take courage then enough to be wise” (Horace). Aristotle goes further than that old adagial saying (<i xml:lang="grc">ἀρχή ἥμισυ παντός</i> “The beginning is half the work”). His words are, <i xml:lang="grc">Δοκεῖ πλεῖον ἢ τὸ ἥμισυ τοῦ παντός εἶναι ἡ ἀρχή</i> “The beginning is more than half the whole business.”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Οὐδὲν γὰρ οὕτω κακῶς συντέτακται τῶν ψυχὴν ἐχόντων, ὥστ᾿ ἀβουλοῦντος αὐτοῦ προϊέναι πόδας ἢ φθέγγεσθαι γλῶτταν <abbr>κτλ.</abbr></i> “No living creatures are so badly constituted, as that their feet will move, and their tongues speak, whether they will or no” (Plutarch). That in Tibullus, <i xml:lang="la">Cùm bene juravi, pes tamen ipso redit</i> “Though I had directly sworn to the contrary, yet my feet would come back again,” is a little poetic sally.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Ὅλως δέ πᾶσα ἀργία καὶ τῆς τυχούσης πράξεώς ἐστιν ἐυμαρεστέρα· οἷον, Οὐ φονεύσεις, οὐ μοιχεύσεις, <abbr class="eoc">κτλ.</abbr></i> “In general, the forbearing to do a thing is very easy: as thou shalt not kill, thou ihalt not commit adultery” (Basil of Caesarea).
<li>Z+Y+X, that is, Z, Y, and X added together.</li>
<li>One might with the <i xml:lang="grc">Στασιῶται</i> “stationary philosophers” (so called by Aristotle in Sextus Empiricus, in opposition to those philosophers who maintained that nothing continued fixed, but everything was in motion) as well deny, that there is any such thing as motion, as say there is motian without a mover; or, which is the same, a first mover.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Πρῶτον μεταβάλλον</i> “Something that first emits any alteration to be made in a thing” (Plato). <i xml:lang="grc">Ἀρχὴ κινήσεωσ ἁπάσης</i> “The principle of all motion” (Plato). <i xml:lang="grc">Πρῶτον κινοῶν</i> “The first mover” (Aristotle).</li>
<li>The greatest men among the ancients denied the possibility of such an ascent. <i xml:lang="grc">Οὔτε γὰρ τόδ᾿ ἐκ τοῦδε δυνατὸν ἰέναι εἰς ἄπειρον</i> “it is impossible for one thing to proceed from another and so on forever” (Aristotle). If there could be such a process, then all the parts of it but the last would be <i xml:lang="grc">μέσα</i> “intermediate ones:” and then <i xml:lang="grc">εἴπερ μηδέν ἐστι τὸ πρῶτον, ὅλως αἴτιον οὐδέν ἐστι, <abbr class="eoc">κτλ.</abbr></i> “if there be no first, there can be no cause at all.” To suppose one thing moved by another, this by another, and so on <i xml:lang="grc">ἐπ᾿ ἄπειον</i> “infinitely,” is to suppose <i xml:lang="grc">ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδυνατὸν᾿ οὐδὲν γὰρ οὕτως οὔτε κινοῦν ἔσται οὔτε κινού μενον, μὴ οὔσης ἀρχῆς τῆς κινούσης</i> “a thing that is impossible; for nothing can either move or be moved in this manner, without any beginning of motion” (Simplicius<!-- ??? could not find quote -->). Not only those Arabian philosophers called <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">מדברים</i> (Hebrew) <i xml:lang="ar" dir="rtl">אלמחכלמון</i> (Arabic), “the rational” (a sect who maintained that the world was eternal) but many of the elder Jews have agreed with the Greeks in this matter, and added arguments of their own. Of the former see <i>Moreh Nevochim</i> (Maimonides) <abbr xml:lang="la">et. al.</abbr> and particularly Sefer Kozri: where their first argument seems to be strong (and much the same with the fourth in Sefer Emnnoth). <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">אם היה החולף אין לו ראשית הנה האישים הנמצאים בומן החולף עד העת הואת אין תכלית להם ומה שאין לו תכלית לא יעא אל הפוצל</i><!-- check this --> “If there be any succession which has no beginning, then the number of those men, who existed during that whole succession down to the present time, must be infinite, and that which is infinite cannot be the effect of any other thing.” For though, as Muscatus observes, these reasonings of the Medabberim <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">לא לרצון היו [המורה] וינפל</i><!-- check this --> “rational philosophers, were not agreeable to him;” yet most certainly let the series of causes and effects be what it will, it is just as long downward as upward; and if they are infinite and inexhaustible one way, they must be so the other too: and then what Se‘adyah Ga’on says, takes place <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">אם לא תגיע ההויה אלינו נהיה <abbr class="eoc">וכו</abbr></i> “If we had no beginning, we could not now exist.” There is another argument of this kind in Justin Martyr, which deserves notice, what stress soever may be laid upon it. <i xml:lang="grc">Εἰ τὸ μέλλον μέρος τοῦ χρόνου, οὔπω ἐστίν᾿ ἦν δὲ καὶ τὸ γελονὸς μέρος τοῦ χρόνου πρὸ τοῦ γενέσθαι μέλλον᾿ ἦν ἄρα ὅτε οὐκ ἦν τὸ γεγονὸς μέρος τοῦ χρόνου</i> “If the future part of time, says he, has no existence, and the part of time that is past was future before it was present, then there was a time when that part of time which is past had no existence.”</li>
<li>Aristotle himself, who asserts the eternity of nation, asserts also the necessity of a first and eternal mover.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Σειρὴν χρυσείην ἐξ οὐρανόθεν</i> “A golden chain hanging down from heaven…” (Homer). <i xml:lang="la">Aurea de cœlo… funis</i> “a golden rope reaching down from heaven” is mentioned too by Lucretius.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">אי אפשר שישתלשל עגין מעלה ועלול אל בלתי תכלית</i><!-- check --> “It is impossible that causes and effects can be connected with each other without end” <i>Sefer ha-Ikkarim</i> Where more may be seen of this <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">השתלשלות</i> “concatenation,” out of Ibn Sinai, Maimonidea, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></li>
<li>The chain must be fastened <i xml:lang="grc">περί ῥίον Οὐλύμποιο</i> “to the top of Olympus.” <i xml:lang="la">Invenietur pressius intuenti à summo Deo usque ad ultimam rerum fæcem… connexio: &amp; hæc est Homeri catena aurea, quam pendere de cœlo in terras Deum jussisse commemorat</i> “Whoever considers the thing closely, says Macrobius, will see that there is a connection of things from the supreme God to the lowest dregs that are…: and this is Homer’s golden chain, which he tells you God commanded to hang down from heaven to the earth.” This matter might be illustrated by other similitudes (even <i xml:lang=he" dir="rtl">שלשלת הקבלה</i> “the chain of the Kabbalah” might serve for one): but I shall set down but one more: and in that indeed the motion is inverted, but the thing is the same taken either way. It occurs in Hhob. halleb.<!-- ??? --> and afterward in <i>Reshit Hokhmah</i> Suppose a row of blind men, of which the last laid his hand upon the shoulder of the man next before him, he on the shoulder of the next before him, and so on till the foremost grew to be quite out of sight; and somebody asking, what guide this string of blind men had at the head of them, it should be answered, that they had no guide, nor any head, but one held by another, and so went on, <abbr xml:lang="la">ad infinitum</abbr> would any rational creature accept this for a just answer? Is it not to say, that infinite blindness (or blindness, if it be infinite) supplies the place of sight, or of a guide?</li>
<li>So Aristotle says of the First mover, <i xml:lang="grc">Οὐκ ἐνδέχεται ἄλλως ἔχειν ἐξ ἀνάγκης ἐστι, <abbr class="eoc">κτλ.</abbr></i> “It is impossible for it to be otherwise; it is necessary.” And after him the Arabic philosophers, Maimonides, Albo, &amp; al. pass.<!-- ??? --> teach all that God exists necessarily: <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">מן השקר העדרו</i> “To suppose him not to be implies a falsity;” or “He cannot be supposed not to be.” This seems to be the import of that name, by which God calls himself in Moses’s history: <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">אהיה אשר אהיה</i> “I am that I am;" or in one word, <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">אהיה</i>, “I will be;" which in the mouth of one who speaks of Him in the third person is <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">יחיה</i> or <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">יחוה</i>, “He will be.” So Philo explains it; <i xml:lang="grc">Εἶναι πέφυκα</i> “Existence belongs to his very nature.” So Abarbanel; <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">אני אהיה בעבור שאהיה כי אין מציאותי תלוי בזולתי אלא בעצמי</i> “I am, because I am; for my existence does not depend upon anything without me, but is from myself:” adding moreover, that it showed God to be, not like other beings, <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">איפשרי המציאות</i> “a being that might or might not have existed,” but <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">מחוייב המציאות מצד עצמו</i> “whose existence flows necessarily from himself,” a <em>Necessary being</em>. And so R.L.b. Gersh.<!-- ??? --> <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">יורה זה השם שהוא הנמצא אשר ימצא מעצמותו</i> “The very name (of God) shows this; for it signifies a being that exists of itself, or from its own nature.” I omit others, who write after the same manner. There have been even Heathens, who seemed to think, that some such name as this belonged to the Deity, and for the same reason. For as <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">אהוה</i> <i>Eheveh</i>, “I shall be,” and thence <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">יהוה</i> <i>Jehovah</i>, “He shall be," are used above, so Plutarch says, that in addressing to Him the second person <i xml:lang="grc">Εἶ</i> (<i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">תהיה</i> or <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">תהוה</i> — <i>Tehejeh</i> or <i>Teheveh</i>) “Thou shalt be,” is <i xml:lang="grc">ἀυτοτελὴς τοῦ Θεοῦ προσαγόρευσις καὶ προσφώνησις</i> “the most complete appellation or title of God:” and that by this compellation we give him <i xml:lang="grc">ἀληθῆ καὶ ἀψευδῆ καὶ μόνην μόνῳ προσήκουσαν τὴν τοῦ εἶναι προσαγόρευσιν. Ἡμῖν μὲν γὰρ ὄντως τοῦ εἶναι μέτεστιν οὐδέν</i> “the true, the certain, and the only title that is peculiar to the self-existent being; for self-existence does not belong to any of us.” It is <i xml:lang="grc">τὸ ἀίδιον καὶ ἀγενητὸν καὶ ἄφθαρτον</i><!-- double-check --> “that which is eternal, which never had any beginning, and which is incorruptible;” that is <i xml:lang="grc">ὄντως ὄν</i> “the being that truly exists.”</li>
<li>Something must be <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">מחוייב המציאות</i> “necessarily existent,” otherwise <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">לא יהיה דבר נמצא כלל</i> “there could be no beings at all:” every thing cannot be <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">אפשר מציאות</i> “precarious or such as might not have existed, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>” <i>Moreh Nevochim</i> <abbr xml:lang="la" class="eoc">et. al.</abbr></li>
<li>This needs no demonstration. But there is a very old one in S. Emun.<!-- ??? -->  and after in Hhob. halleb.<!-- ??? --> <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">עושה את עצמו אל ימלפ מאחד משני דברים שעשה את עצמו קודם הויתו או אחר הויתו ושניהם אי אפשר <abbr class="eoc">וכו׳</abbr></i><!-- check this --> “He who makes himself, must be said to do one of these two things, <abbr xml:lang="la">viz.</abbr> either to have made himself before he existed, or else to have made himself after he existed, either of which is impossible.”</li>
<li>What relation or analogy there is between time (a flux of moments) and eternal (unchangeable) existence; how any being should not be older now, than he was 5,000 years ago, <abbr>etc.</abbr> are speculations attended with insuperable difficulties. Nor are they at all cleared by that of Timæus in Plato <i xml:lang="grc">Ὡς ποτ᾿ ἀἴδιον παράδειγμα τόν ἰδανικὸν κόσμον ὅδε ὠρανός ἐγεννάθη, οὕτως ὡς πρός παράδειγμα τόν αἰῶνα ὅδε χρόνος σύν κόσμῳ ἐδαμιουργήθη</i>; “As the heavens were formerly made according to the eternal pattern of the world in the intellectual mind, so time was made with this world according to the pattern of an age;” or that in Philo <i xml:lang="grc">Ἀιὼν ἀναγράφεται τοῦ νοητοῦ βίος ϰόσμου, ὡς αἰσθητοῦ χρόνος</i> “An age is described to be the length of the intellectual world, as time is the length of the visible world.” Many philosophers therefore have thought themselves obliged to deny that God exists in time. <i xml:lang="grc">Τό, τ᾿ ἦν, τό, τ᾿ ἔσται, χρόνου γεγονότος εἴδη, φέροντες λανθάνομεν ἐπὶ τὴν ἀίδιον οὐσίαν οὐκ ὀρθῶς, <abbr class="eoc">κτλ.</abbr></i> “Past and future are parts of that time which is made (with the world) and it is very wrong to apply these to an eternal being” (Plato). <i xml:lang="grc">Ἔστιν ὁ Θεὸς, χρὴ φάναι, καὶ ἔστι κατ᾽ οὐδένα χρόνον ἀλλὰ κατὰ τὸν αἰῶνα τὸν ἀκίνητον, καὶ ἄχρονον καὶ ἀνέγκλιτον, καὶ οὗ πρότερον, οὐδέν ἐστιν, οὐδ᾽ ὕστερον οὐδὲ νεώτερον· ἀλλ᾿ εἷς ὢν ἑνὶ τῷ νῦν τὸ ἀεὶ πεπλήρωκε, <abbr class="eoc">κτλ.</abbr></i> “We must allow that God exists, though not in any time, but in a duration that has no succession, that is eternal and invariable; before which there was nothing, nor will there be any after or later than it; and that he is a single being who fills all eternity as if it were a single moment” (Plutarch). <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">השם יתעלה אין יחם בינו ובין הזמן וכו</i><!-- check this --> “That name (Jehovah) shall be exalted, there is no proportion betwixt it and the present time” (Maimonides). <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">אינו מצוי בומן</i><!-- check --> “He (God) does not exist in time” (Maimonides). Albo has a whole chapter to show <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">ה״יש אינו נופל תחת הזמן</i><!-- check --> “that he, whose name is blessed, cannot be compared (as to his duration) with the time that now is.” But then he owns, that their Rabbis do not mean <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">הזמן בשלוח</i><!-- check --> “time in general,” or <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">זמן סתם</i><!-- check --> “mere duration," or that <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">בלתי נספר ומשוער והוא המשך שהיה קודם מציאות הגלגל <abbr class="eoc">וכו׳</abbr></i> “time which cannot be reckoned, and which is duration itself, and was before the world was;” but <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">הזמן המשוער בתנועת הגלגל נקרא סדר זמניס לא זמן בשלוח <abbr class="eoc">וכו׳</abbr></i> “that time which is reckoned by the motion of the world, and is called the order or succession of time, and not absolute time.” In short, they reckon (to use R.<!-- Rabbi? --> Gedal’s words) <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">שזמן האמתי הוא נברא והמשך אינו קרוי ומן</i><!-- check --> “that time, properly so called, is created, and that duration is not called time.” And so what they say, does not include all the present difficulty, “time” in their use of the word being confined to the duration of this world, which according to them is new. Yet see b. 2. c. 19.<!-- ??? --> <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">הש״י א״א שיאמר עליו שיש לו יותר זמן היום ממה שהיה לו בימי רויד וממה שהיה לו כשברא העולם</i><!-- check --> “Blessed be that name (Jehovah) it is not possible to affirm concerning him, that he is older today, than he was in the days of David, or than he was when he first created this world.”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Οἶδα μὲν πολλὰ οὐκ ἐπίσταμενος δὲ αὐτῶν τὸν τρόπον.… ὅτι ἄναρχός ἔστιν [ὁ Θεὸς], καὶ ἀγέννητος, καὶ ἀἴδιος, οἶδα· τὸ δὲ πῶς οὐκ οἶδα</i> “There are a great many things that I understand, without knowing the particular manner how they are so.… I know that God is without beginning and unbegotten, but I know not the manner how he is so,” so Chrysostom.</li>
<li>Simonides had good reason still to double upon Hiero the number of days allowed for answering that question, <i xml:lang="la">Quid, aut quale sit Deus?</i> “What or what sort of a being is God?" (in Cicero).</il>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Nec viget quidquam simile aut secundum</i> “Nor is there any being in the world like or any thing near to him” (Horace).</li>
<li>In <i>Moreh Nevochim</i> Maimonides having proved, that there must be some Being, who exists necessarily, or whose existence is necessary <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">בבחינת עצמז</i> “if we examine into his nature,” proceeds from this necessity of existence to derive incorporeity, absolute simplicity, perfection, and particularly unity, <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">המחוייב המציאות אי אפשר בו השניות כלל לא דומה ולא הפך <abbr class="eoc">וכו</abbr></i> “It is impossible that the number two can be applied to that which exists necessarily; there is nothing that can be compared to it, nor no reverse of it.”</li>
<li>Therefore by Plato He is called <i xml:lang="grc">Ὀ εἷς</i> “the One.”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Deus, si perfectus est,… ut esse debet, non potest esse nisi unus, ut in eo sint omnia</i> “God, if He is a perfect being,… as He must be, can be but One, that all things may be in him.” If there could be more Gods than one, <i xml:lang="la">tantum singulis deerit, quantum in cæteris fuerit</i> “everyone would want what the other had” (Lactantius)</li>
<li>As light and darkness are. <i xml:lang="grc">Δύο γὰρ ἐξισάζοντα ἀλλήλοις κατ᾿ ἐναντίωσιν, φθαρτικὰ ἔσται πάντως τῆς ἀλλήλων συστάσεως</i> “For two things that are equal, and directly contrary, destroy each other entirely” (Basil of Caesarea). There can be no such law between them, as is said to be among the Heathen deities. <i xml:lang="grc">Θεοῖσι δ᾿ ὡδ᾿ ἔχει νόμος. Ούδεὶς άπαντᾷν βούλεται προθυμίᾳ Τῇ τοῦ θέλοντος, <abbr>κτλ.</abbr></i> “The law amongst the Gods is this, that when any one of them would have anything, no other God contradicts what he desires” (Euripides).
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Ἀπόλωλεν ἡ ἀλήθει᾿, ἐπεὶ σὺ δυστυχεῖς</i> “So that, because things go ill with you, there must be an end of truth” (Euripides).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Ψυχὴν ἔχεις ἀυτεξούσιον᾿… οὐ γὰρ κατὰ γένεσιν ἁμαρτάνεις, οὔτε κατὰ τύχην πορνεύεις, <abbr class="eoc">κτλ.</abbr></i> “You have a soul that is absolutely free:… you were not created a sinner, nor do you commit whoredom by chance” (Cyril of Jerusalem).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Ὧν ἀυτὸς εἶ κύριος, τούτων τὰς ἀρχὰς μὴ ζητήσῃς ἑτέρωθεν</i> “Do not seek without you, for the causes of the things which are entirely in your own power” (<abbr>St.</abbr> Basil)</li>
<li>“Must God extinguish sun, moon, and stars, because some people worship them?” <i>Mishnah</i>. <i xml:lang="grc">Αὐτοῦ τοῦ ἑλομενου αἰτία, Θεὸς ἀναίτιος</i> “The fault lies in him who chooses to do the thing, God is not to blame” (Maximus Tyrius).
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Ἡ δίψα μὲν σώματι παρασκευάζει ἡδονὴν ποτοῦ, <abbr class="eoc">κτλ.</abbr></i> “It is thirst that makes the pleasure of drinking agreeable to the body” (Maximus Tyrius). This observation might be extended a great way. If there was, <abbr>e.g.</abbr> no such thing as poverty, there could be no riches, or no great benefit by them; there would be scarce any arts or sciences, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> <i xml:lang="grc">Ἂν γὰρ ἀνέλῃς τὴν πενίαν, τοῦ βίου τὴν σύστασιν ἀνεῖλες ἅπασαν, <abbr class="eoc">κτλ.</abbr></i> “Take away poverty, and you destroy the whole state of life” (<abbr>St.</abbr> Chrysostom).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Τὰ μέρη πρὸς ἀυτὸ τὸ ὅλον δεῖ σκοπεῖν, ἐἰ σύμφωνα καὶ ἁρμόττοντα ἐκείνω̨</i> “The parts must be compared with the whole, if we would see whether they are agreeable and fitted thereto,” with more to this purpose (Plotinus).</li>
<li>See <i>Moreh Nevochim</i> 3.12.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Πολυειδὴς ἡ τοῦ Θεοῦ ἰατρική</i> “God has provided several sorts of physic” (Simplicius).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Κακία βλάστημα τῆς ϋλης</i> “Evil is a bud that springs from matter” (Plutarch).</li>
<li>To that question, Why are We not so made, <i xml:lang="grc">ὥστε μηδὲ βουλομένοις ἡμῖν ὑπάρχειν τὸ ἁμαρτάνειν</i> “as to be incapable of committing sin?” <abbr>St.</abbr> Basil answers, Because <i xml:lang="grc">ἀρετὴ ἐκ προαιρέσεως καὶ οὐκ ἐξ ἀνάγκης γίνεται</i> “virtue is from our own choice, and not from any necessity.” And he who blames the Deity, because we are not impeccable, <i xml:lang="grc">οὐδὲν ἕτερον ἤ τὴν ἄλογον φύσιν τῆς λογικῆς προτιμᾷ, καὶ τὴν ἀκίνητον καὶ ἀνόρμητον τῆς προαιρετικῆς καὶ ἐμπράκτου</i> “does the very same thing as he does, who prefers a creature not endowed with reason to one that is, and a creature that has not the power of moving itself, and is void of all appetites, to a free agent and one that can choose what he will do.”
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Ἀθληταὶ ἀρετῆς</i> “Champions for virtue,” as Philo.</li>
<li>In Chrysostom’s style, <i xml:lang="grc">ἀρετῆς ἐπιμελεῖσθαι, καὶ καθάπερ ἐν παλαίστρᾳ ἐπὶ τοῦ παρόντος βίου ἀγωνίζεσθαι, ῖνα μετὰ τὸ λυθῆναι τὸ θέατρον λαμπρὸν ἀναδήσασθαι δυνηθῶμεν τὸν στέφανον</i><!-- couldn't find this --> “To be industrious after virtue, and to strive in this present life, as in a place where exercises are to be performed; that, when we go off the stage, we may be crowned with a crown of glory.”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Εἰ σῶμά ἐστι, φύσις δὲ σώματος μεριζομένη ἐις πλείω, ἕκαστον τῶν μὴ τὸ αὐτὸ εἶναι (</i><abbr>f.</abbr><!-- ??? --> <i xml:lang="grc">ἔσται) τῷ ὅλῳ</i><!-- check --> “If it be made of matter, and if it be the property of matter to be divided into a multitude of parts, every single part will not be the same as the whole,” says Plotinus, even of the soul.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Δέδεικται δὲ καὶ ὅτι μέγεθος οὐδὲν ἐνδέχεται ἔχειν ταύτην οὐσίαν ἀλλὰ ἀμερὴς καὶ ἀδιαίρετός ἐστιν</i> “It has been shown before, that nobody can be of this nature; it must be something indivisible, and whose parts cannot be separated from each other” (Aristotle).</li>
<li>They who call God <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">מקום</i> “space” do it <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">לפי שהוא מקום הכל ואין הכל מקומו</i> “because He is the space in which the whole universe is contained, and not because the universe is the space in which He is contained” (Thishbi<!-- ??? -->). Or, as Phil. Aquin.<!-- ??? --> from the ancients, <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">הקב״ה מקום של עולם ואין עולמו מקימו</i><!-- check --> “The holy and blessed Being is the space in which the universe is contained, and not the universe the space in which He is contained.” <i xml:lang="grc">Οὐ γὰρ περιέχεται [ὁ Θεὸς], ἀλλὰ περιέχει τὸ πᾶν</i> “For He (God) is not comprehended in any thing, but He comprehends all things” (Philo Judaeus). By which ways of speaking (though there is a Kabbalistic reason assigned too) they intend chiefly to express his omnipresence and immensity. That in Acts of the Apostles seems to be of the same kind, <i xml:lang="grc">Ἐν ἀυτῷ γὰρ ζῶμεν, καὶ κινούμεθα, καὶ ἐσμεν</i> “In him we live, and move, and have our beings.”</li>
<li>Such things as these, how incongruous and wild soever they are, have been affirmed; that God is infinite duration, space, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> What can be meant by that, <i xml:lang="grc">Καλῶς ἂν λέγοιτο ὁ ἀιὼν θεὸς</i> “God may be properly called eternity,” in Plotinus?</li>
<li>Were not they, who converse with books, accustomed to such trials, it would be shocking to find Balbus in Cicero asserting, <i xml:lang="la">esse mundum deum</i> “that the world was God:” and yet in another place, that it is <i xml:lang="la">quasi communis deorum, atque hominum domus, aut urbs utrorumque</i> “as it were the common house of the Gods and of men, or the city of both of them;” and <i xml:lang="la">deorum, hominumque cause factus</i> “was made for the sake of the Gods and of men:" in another, <i xml:lang="la">providentia deorum mundum, &amp; omnes mundi partes &amp; initio constitutas esse, &amp; omni tempore administrari</i> “that the world, and all the parts of the world, were in the beginning made by the providence of the Gods, and were always governed by the same:” in another, <i xml:lang="la">mundum ipsum naturâ administrari</i> “that the world itself is governed by nature:” with other like inconsistences.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Ἄτοπον ἐι μία ἠ ἐμὴ [ψυχὴ] καὶ ἡ ὁτιοῦν ἄλλου· ἐχρῆν γὰρ ἐμοῦ αἰσθανομένου καὶ ἄλλον αἰσθάνεσθαι… καὶ ὅλως ὁμοπαθεῖν ἡμᾶς τε πρὸς ἀλλήλους, καὶ πρὸς τὸ πᾶν</i> “It is absurd that my (soul) and the soul of any other person should be one and the same; for then it must needs be, that when I perceived anything, he would perceive it also… and he and I and all the whole universe would be affected alike” (Plotinus). Here this author is clear, though at some other times very dark.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Cur quidquam ignoraret animus hominis, si esset Deus?</i> “If the soul of man were a God, how could it be ignorant of anything?” (Cicero).</li>
<li>The system of Spinoza is so apparently false, and full of impieties and contradictions, that more needs not be said against it: though much might be. What Velleius says in Cicero, is not only true, <i xml:lang="la">Si mundus est deus… dei membra partim ardentia partim refrigerata dicenda sunt</i> “that if the world be God… then the members of God may be said to be some of them hot, and some of them cold:” but if there is but one substance, one nature, one being, and this being is God, then all the follies, madnesses, wickednesses that are in the world, are in God; then all things done and suffered are both done and suffered by Him; He is both cause and effect: He both wills and nills, affirms and denies, loves and hates the same things at the same time, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> That such gross Atheism as this should ever be fashionable! Atheism: for certainly when we inquire, whether there is a God, we do not inquire, whether we ourselves and all other things which are visible about us do exist: something different from them must be intended. Therefore to say, there is no God different from them, is to say, there is no God at all.</li>
<li>What Censorinus charges upon many great men (but upon some of them surely unjustly) is to me unintelligible. He says, they believed <i xml:lang="la">semper homines fuisse, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “mankind always existed, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>” and then, <i xml:lang="la">Itaque &amp; omnium, quæ in sempiterno isto mundo semper fuerunt, futuraque sunt, aiunt principium fuisse nullum; sed orbem esse quemdam generantium, nascentiumque, in quo uniuscujusque geniti initium simul &amp; finis esse videatur</i> “They say that there was no beginning of all those things, which have existed in that world which was from eternity; but that there is a certain round of things generated and springing up, which round seems to be both the beginning and the end of every thing that is produced.”</li>
<li>So what we call attraction and aversion (centripetal and centrifugal forces) seem to have been called by Empedocles: <i xml:lang="grc">φιλία ᾗ συγκρίνεται [τὰ στοιχεῖα], καὶ νεῖκος ᾧ διακρίνεται</i><!-- couldn't find this --> “a kind of friendship by which they (the elements) are united together; and a sort of discord, whereby they are separated from each other” (Diogenes Laërtius v.<!-- vide? --> Emp.<!-- sextus empiricus? -->, v.<!-- vide? --> Arist.<!-- -ippus? -otle? -->, Cicero, <abbr class="eoc">et al.</abbr>).</li>
<li>So far is that from being true, <i xml:lang="la">Nequaquam… divinitus esse creatam Naturam mundi, quæ tantâ est prædita culpâ</i> “That the world could never becreated by a divine Being, there are so many faults in it” (Lucretius). Men rashly (impiously) censure what they do not understand. Like that king of Castile, who fancied himself able to have contrived a better system of the world; because he knew not what the true system is, but took it to be as ascribed to him by R. Is. ab Sid.<!-- ??? --> and other astronomers of those times.</li>
<li>Since they have, or may have great effects upon the several parts of the solar system, one may speak thus without falling into the superstition of the multitude, or meaning what is intended by that, <i xml:lang="la">Nunquam cœlo spectatum impune cometen</i> “A comet is never seen in the heavens but for some punishment” (in Claudian) or the like.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Finitus, &amp; infinito similis</i> “Finite, but very near to infinite” (Pliny, the elder).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Ποικίλη θανματουργία</i> “Variety of surprising things” (Plotinus).</li>
<li>If any one, sitting upon mount Ida, had seen the Greek army coming on in proper order <i xml:lang="grc">[μετὰ πολλοῦ κόσμου καὶ τάξεως τοῖς πεδίοις προσιοῦσαν]</i> (“marching over the fields in rank and file"), he ought most certainly, nowithstanding what Sextus Empiricus says, to have concluded, that there was some commander, under whose conduct they moved.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Τίς ὁ ἁρμόζων τὴν μάχαίραν πρὸς τὸ κολεὸν, καὶ τὸ κολεὸν πρὸς τὴν μάχαιραν, <abbr class="eoc">κτλ.</abbr></i> “Who was it that fitted the sword to the scabbard, and the scabbard to the sword?” (Arrian). Even such a thing as this does not come by accident.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Hoc qui existimat fieri potuisse, non intelligo cur non idem putet, si innumerabiles unius &amp; viginti formæ literarum,… aliquè conjiciantur, posse ex his in terram excussis annales Ennij, ut deinceps legi possint, effici: quod nescio anne in uno quidem versu possit tantum valere fortuna</i> “He who thinks that this is possible to be, I don’t see but he may as well think, that an infinite number of alphabets,… cast anywhere upon the ground at a venture, might come up the annals of Ennius, so as any one might read them; whereas I question whether chance is capable of producing one verse of them” (Cicero). But alas, what are Ennius’s annals to such a work as the world is!</li>
<li>He was <i xml:lang="grc">πολυγραφώτατος, πάντας ὑπερβαλόμενος πλήθει βιβλίων</i> “a great writer, and exceeded all others in the quantity of books” (Diogenes Laërtius). But that part of his physics is here meant, in which he treated of the origin of the world; or rather of infinite worlds; which makes his thought the grosser still. For infinite worlds require infinite chances infinitely repeated.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Series implexa causarum</i> “A series of causes connected with each other” (Seneca).</li>
<li>Seneca says himself, that in this series God is <i xml:lang="la">prima omnium causa, ex quâ cæteræ pendent</i>, “the first of all the causes, and upon him the rest depend.” Indeed it is many times difficult to find out what the ancients meant by “fate.” Sometimes it seems to follow the motions of the heavenly bodies and their aspects. Of this kind of fate is that passage in Suetonius to be understood, where he says that Tiberius was <i xml:lang="la">addictus mathematicæ, persuasionisque plenus cuncta fato agi</i> “given to mathematics, and fully persuaded that all things were governed by fate.” Sometimes it is confounded with “fortune.” So in Lucian we find <i xml:lang="grc">τὴν τύχην πράξουσαν τὰ μεμοιραμένα, καὶ ἃ ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἑκάστῳ ἐπεκλώσθη</i> “fortune doing the things which are determind by fate, and destined to every one from the beginning.” And sometimes it is the same with God: as when the Stoics say, <i xml:lang="grc">ἕν τε εἶναι θεὸν καὶ νοῦν καὶ εἱμαρμένην καὶ Δία</i> “God, and mind, and fate, and Jupiter, are all the same,” (in Diogenes Laërtius and the like elsewhere).</li>
<li>As when Strato of Lampsacus according to Tully, <i xml:lang="la">docet omnia esse effecta naturâ</i> “teaches that all things are the effects of nature.”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Vis &amp; natura justitiæ</i> “The force and nature of justice” (Cicero).</li>
<li>Almost as if it stood for <i xml:lang="la">nata</i>, or <i xml:lang="la">res natæ</i>; “all things that are produced.” (So <i xml:lang="la">fœtura</i> seems to be put sometimes for <i xml:lang="la">fœtus</i> “the child in the womb.”) <i xml:lang="la">Sunt, qui omnia naturæ nomine appellent;… corpora, &amp; inane, quæque his accidant</i> “Some persons use the word nature for everything;… bodies and space, and all the properties of these” (Cicero).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Natura, inquit, hæc mihi præstat. Non intelligis te, cùm hoc dicis, mutare nomen Deo? Quid enim aliud est Natura, quàm Deus, &amp; divina ratio, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “Nature, says he, gives me these things. Do you not see, when you say this, that you only put another name for God? For what else is nature, but God, and the divine reason, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>” (Seneca). When it is said, <i xml:lang="la">Necesse est mundum ipsum natura administrari</i> “that the world must necessarily be governed by nature” (in Cicero) what sense are those words capable of, if by nature be not really meant God? For it must be something different from the world, and something able to govern it.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Alii naturam censent esse vim quandam sine ratione, cirntem motus in corporibus necessarios, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “Some think nature to be a certain power or force without reason, producing the necessary motions in bodies, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>” says Balbus in Cicero. What can this <i xml:lang="la">vis</i> “power" be: <i xml:lang="la">vis</i> “power” by itself, without the mention of any subject, in which it inheres; or of any cause, from whence it proceeds? A soul of the world, plastic nature, hylarchic principle, <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">שכל פועל</i> “an understanding principle," and the like, are more intelligible than that.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">דע כאין באת ולאן אתה הולך' <abbr class="eoc">וכו</abbr></i> “Search out from whence you came, and whither you are going” (Pirkei Avot).</li>
<li>For I cannot think that any body will now stand by that way of introducing men first into the world, which is mentioned by Diodorus Siculus but asserted by Lucretius. <i xml:lang="la">Ubi quæque loci regio opportuna dabatur, Crescebant uteri terræ radicibus apti, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “Where the country was proper for it, there grew wombs out of the earth, fixed to it by their roots, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>”</li>
<li>What by Tertullian in one place is called <i xml:lang="la">animæ ex Adam tradux</i>, “a soul derived from Adam," in another is <i xml:lang="la">velut surculus quidam ex matrice Adam in propaginem deducta</i> “as it were a shoot derived from the womb of Adam, that the race might be continued,” and equally unintelligible. Nor does he explain himself better, when he confesses there to be <i xml:lang="la">duas species seminis, corporalem &amp; anamalem (<abbr>al.</abbr> corporis semen &amp; animæ)</i> “two sorts of seed, corporeal and animal (or a seed of the soul, and another of the body)”: or more fully, <i xml:lang="la">semen animale ex animæ distillatione, sicut &amp; virus illud, corporale semen, ex carnis defæcatione</i> “an animal seed flowing from the soul, as the bodily seed does from the body.”</li>
<li>According to the fore-cited author the soul is derived from the father only, <i xml:lang="la">&amp; genitalibus fœminæ foveis commendata</i> “delivered to the womb of the mother;” and all souls from that of Adam. <i xml:lang="la">Definimus animam, Dei flatu natam, ex una redundantem</i> “We, says he, define the soul to spring from the breath of God, and all souls to proceed from one:” and in another place, <i xml:lang="la">ex uno homine tota hæc animarum redundantia agitur</i> “all the souls that are, come originally from one man.” But this does not well consist with his principal argument for traduction, that children take after their parents. For beside what will here be said by and by, if there is a traduction of all men from one man, and traduction causes likeness; then every man must be like the first, and (consequently) every other.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Unde, oro te, similitudine animæ quoque parentibus de ingeniis respondemus,… si non ex animæ femine educimur?</i> “Whence is it, I beseech you, says the same author, that we are so like our parents in the dispositions of our minds,… if we be not produced from the seed of the soul?” Then to confirm this, he argues like a father indeed, thus; <i xml:lang="la">in illo ipso voluptatis ultimo æstu quo genitale virus expellitur, nonne aliquid de anima quoque sentimus exire?</i> “Do we not in the act of generation perceive some part of our very souls to go out of us?” I am ashamed to transcribe more.</li>
<li>Therefore the said father makes the soul to be corporeal.</li>
<li>This might seem to be favored by them who hold, that all souls were created in the beginning (an opinion mentioned in Nahh. ab.<!-- Nezikin Avot??? a book of some sort --> <abbr xml:lang="la">et al.</abbr> often), did not the same authors derive the body <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">מטפה סרוחה</i> “from a small seed:” as may be seen in P. Abb. <i xml:lang="la">et passim</i>. Particularly R. D. Qimhhi says of man, <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">גופו נכרא מטיפת הזרע אשר תהפך לדם, ומשם יגדל מעט מעט עד שישתלמו אבריו</i><!-- check --> “That his body is produced out of a small seed, which is first converted into blood, and then increases by degrees, till all the members of it are complete.”</li>
<li>This account destroys that argument, upon which Censorinus says many of the old philosophers asserted the eternity of the world: <i xml:lang="la">quod negent omnino posse reperiri, avesne ante, an ova generata sint; cùm &amp; ovum sine ave, &amp; avis sine ovo gigni non possit</i> “Because they denied the possibility of finding out, which is first generated, the birds or the eggs; because an egg cannot be produced without a bird, nor a bird without an egg.” This question was once much agitated in the world, as may be seen by Macrobius and Plutarch; who calls it, <i xml:lang="grc">τὸ ἄπορον καὶ πολλὰ πράγματα τοῖς ζητητικοῖς παρέχον… πρόβλημα</i> “a problem that cannot be solved, and which put the curious to great difficulties.”</li>
<li>This is as much as Epicurus had to say for his atoms: for they were only <i xml:lang="grc">σώματα λόγῳ θεωρητά, <abbr class="eoc">κτλ.</abbr></i> “imaginary bodies” (Justin Martyr).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Οὐ γὰρ τῷ θεωρουμένῳ τὸ θεωρεῖν</i> “For the thing which is speculated upon, cannot speculate" (Plotinus).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Si nulla fuit genitalis origo terrai &amp; cœli… Cur supra bellum Thebanum &amp; funera Trojæ Non alias alii quoque res cecinere poctæ?</i> “If the earth and the heavens never had any beginning,… how comes it to pass that the poets never celebrated any other matters before the wars of Thebes and the destruction of Troy?” (Lucretius).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Πολλαὶ καὶ κατὰ πολλὰ φθοραὶ γεγόνασιν ἀνθρώπων, καὶ ἔσονται, πυρὶ μὲν καὶ ὕδατι μέγισται</i> “There has been great destruction made of mankind many times and in many places, and will be so again; the greatest of them have been by fire and water” (Plato).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Τοὺς ἀγραμμάτους καὶ ἀμούσους</i> “Such as could not tell their letters, or distinguish one sound from another,” as Plato speaks.</li>
<li>For what has been said only in general, and presumptively, to serve a cause, signifies nothing: no more than that testimony in Arnobius, where he seems to allow, that there have been universal conflagrations. <i xml:lang="la">Quando mundus incensus in favillas &amp; cineres dissolutus est? Non ante nos?</i> “When, says he, was the world so burned as to be reduced to dust and ashess? Has it not been so formerly?”</li>
<li>Propositions <a href="#v5">V</a> and <a href="#v6">VI</a>.</li>
<li>If that in Terence had been (not a question, as it is there, but) an affirmation, <i xml:lang="la">Ego homuncio hoc non facerem</i> “I, poor mortal, would not have done such a thing," what a bitter reflection had it been upon the heathen deity?</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Λέγομεν ὃ μή ἐστιν᾿ ὃ δέ ἐστιν, οὐ λέγομεν</i> “We affirm what He is not, but we do not affirm what He is” (Plotinus).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">איןדרך להשיגו אלא ממעשיו</i><!-- check --> “There is no way to know what sort of being He is but by his works” (Maimonides).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">מקרני ראמים עד ביצי כנים</i> “From the horns of the unicorns to the feet of the lice,” as the Jews speak.</li>
<li>I shall not pretend here to meddle with particular cases relating to inanimate or irrational beings; such as are mentioned in <i>Moreh Nevochim</i> (a leaf’s falling from a tree, a spider’s catching a fly, <abbr>etc.</abbr>) and which are there said to be <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">במקרה גמור</i> “by mere accident.” Though it is hard to separate these many times from the cases of rational beings; as also to comprehend what <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">מקרה גמור</i> “perfect accident,” is.</li>
<li>Pliny in his chapter <i xml:lang="la">De ordine naturæ in satis, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “concerning the course and order of nature in the growth of corn, <abbr>etc.</abbr>" treats of trees in terms taken from animals.</li>
<li>Therefore if those Essenes in Josephus, who are said <i xml:lang="grc">ἐπὶ μὲν Θεῷ καταλιπεῖν τὰ πάντα</i> “to leave all things to God,” excluded human endeavors, they must be much in the wrong.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Ut siquis in domum aliquam, aut in gymnasium, aut in forum venerit, cùm <em>videat</em> omnium rerum rationem, modum, disciplinam, non possit ea sine causa fieri judicare, sed esse aliquem intelligat, qui præsit, &amp; cui pareatur, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “In the same manner as if anyone should come into a house or place of public exercise, or into any court of justice, and <em>see</em> everything in exact order and according to strict discipline; such a one could not think that all those things were done without a cause, but he would immediately apprehend, that there was somebody at the head, whose commands were obeyed, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>” (Cicero).</li>
<li>Little things have many times unforeseen and great effects: &amp; contra. The bare sight of a fig, shown in the senate-house at Rome, occasiond Carthage to be destroyed: <i xml:lang="la">quod non Trebia, aut Trasymenus, non Cannæ busto insignes Romani nominis perficere potuere; non castra Punica ad tertium lapidem vallata, portæque Collinæ adequitans ipse Hannibal</i> “Which neither the river Po, nor the lake Trasymenus, nor the city of Canna, famous for the overthrow of almost the whole Roman nation, could do; no, nor the African camp intrenched for three miles round, nor Hannibal himself who ventured to the very gates of Rome” (Pliny, the elder). The whole story is thus related by the same author: Cato, being very solicitous that Carthage should be utterly destroyed, produced one day in the senate-house a ripe fig, which was brought from thence, and, showing it to the senators, asked them, how long they thought it was, since that fig was plucked off the tree? They all agreed that it was very fresh; upon which he told them that it was pluckd at Carthage but three days before; so near, says he, is the enemy to our walls. And this was the occasion of the third Punic war, in which Carthage was utterly destroyed.</li>
<li>While every one pushes his own designs, they must interfere, and hinder one another. <i xml:lang="la">Ad summum succedere honorem Certantes, iter infestum fecere viai</i> “By striving to get to the highest dignity, they render the way very dangerous” (Lucretius).</li>
<li>Or is it not more likely, <i xml:lang="grc">πιπτούσης οἰκοδομίας, τὸν ὑποπεσόντα ἀποθανεῖν, ὁ ποιὸς ποτ´ ἂν ᾖ</i> “that when a house falls, he that it falls upon should be killed, what sort of a man soever he be (good or bad)” in Plotinus’s words?</li>
<li>Something more than this we meet with in Onq.<!-- ??? -->’s paraphrase, where it is said, that upon Moses’s prayer, <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">מטרא דחוה נחית לא מטא על ארעא</i> “the rain, that was falling, did not reach to the earth.” Which same place Rashi eplains after the same manner; <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">[טרא] לא הגיע [ארצה] .ואף אותן שהיו באויר לא הגיעו לארץ</i><!-- check --> “The rain came not to the earth, and also that of it, which was in the air, did not fall to the ground.”</li>
<li>In Lucian, <i xml:lang="grc">τῶν πλεόντων ὁ μὲν βορέαν ηὔχετο ἐπιπνεῦσαι᾿ ὁ δὲ, νότον᾿ ὁ δὲ γεωργὸς ᾔτει ὑετόν᾿ ὁ δὲ κναφεὺς, ἥλιον</i> “Some of the sailors pray for a north-wind, and some for a south-wind; the countryman wishes for wet weather, and the fuller for sun-shiny.”</li>
<li>Some have talked to this purpose. So Rabbi Albo says of some prophets and hhasidim, “holy men,” <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">שישנו הטבע או ישתנה בעכירם</i><!-- check --> “that they can alter the course of nature, or it will be altered for them.” So Rabbi Isaac Aboab that the good or evil, which happens to a man in this world by way of reward or punishment, <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">אין זה רק במעשה הנם והוא נס נסתר יחשוב בו הרואה שהוא של עולם</i> “is not only by plain miracles, but also by obscure marks; as any one may imagine, who sees the manner of the world.” So Abarbanel <i xml:lang="he">היכולת האלהי הוא משנה הטבעים בהשגחתו <abbr class="eoc">וכו׳</abbr></i> “It is that power of God which changes nature by his providence.” And accordingly in Seder Tephilloth<!-- ??? --> we find this thanksgiving: <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">מודים אנחנו… על נסיך שבכל יום עמנו</i> “praise thee… for thy wonders which we behold every day.”</li>
<li>What Seneca says of the Gods (in the heathen style), may be said of the true God. <i xml:lang="la">Nota est illi operis sui series: omniumque illi rerum per manus suas iturarum scientia in aperto semper est; nobis ex abdito subit, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “Known unto him is the whole course of his works; the knowledge of all those things, which are to pass through his hands, is clear to him, but obscure to us, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Ὁ γὰρ ζωοπλάστης θεὸς ἐπίσταται τὰ ἑαυτοῦ καλῶς δημιουργήματα</i> “God, who formed all living creatures, understands his own works thoroughly” (Philo Judaeus).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Ipsæ nostræ voluntates in causarum ordine sunt, qui certus est Deo, ejusque præscientia continetur, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “Our wills themselves may be looked upon as causes, the manner of which God certainly knows, and it is contained in his foreknowledge, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>” (<abbr>St.</abbr> Augustine)</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Etsi quem exitum acies habitura sit, divinare nemo potest; tamen belli exitum video, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “Though nobody can tell what may happen to the army, yet I see what the event of the war will be, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>” And after, <i xml:lang="la">quem ego tam video animo, quam ea, qua oculis cernimus</i> “I see it as plainly in my mind, as I can see anything with my eyes” (Cicero).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">אין זה ידיעה ממין ידיעתנו</i> “His knowledge is not such a sort of a knowledge as ours is.” It differs not <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">ברב ובמעט לבד אבל במין הסציאה</i> “only in degree, but in kind” (Maimonides).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Ignari, quid queat esse, Quid nequeat:</i> “Who are ignorant of what can be, and what cannot be:" to use Lucretius’s words more properly.</li>
<li>To attempt to comprehend the manner of God’s knowing is the same as to endeavor <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">שנהיח אנהנו הוא</i> “to become what He is” (Maimonides).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">ידיעתה במה שיהיה לא יוציא הדבר האפשר מטבעו</i> “His knowledge of anything that is future does not produce the thing that is possible in nature” (Maimonides). Much might be inserted upon this subject (out of Abarbanel particularly) which I shall omit.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Sicut enim tu memoriâ tuâ non cogis facta esse quæ præterierunt; sic Deus præscientiâ suâ non cogit facienda quæ futura sunt</i> “As we do not force the things that are past to have been done by our remembering them; so God does not force the things that are future to be done by his foreknowing them” (<abbr>St.</abbr> Augustine)</li>
<li>Things come to pass <i xml:lang="grc">καὶ κατὰ φυσικὰς ἀκολουθίας καὶ κατὰ λόγον</i> “according to their natural course, and according to reason;” and even <i xml:lang="la">τὰ σμικρότερα δεῖ συντετάχθαι καὶ συνυφάνθαι νομίζειν</i> “the most minute things, we ought to think, are duly regulated and connected with each other” (Plotinus). That in Seneca looks something like this: <i xml:lang="la">Hoc dico, fulmina non mitti a Jove, sed sic omnia disposita, ut ea etiam, quæ ab illo non fiunt, tamen sine ratione non fiant: qua illius est.…  Nam etsi Jupiter illa nunc non facit, fecit ut fierent</i> “I affirm this, that lightning does not come immediately from Jupiter himself; but everything is so ordered, that even those things, which are not done by Him, are notwithstanding not done without reason; which reason is his.… For though Jupiter does not do these things at this time, yet He was the cause of their being done.”</li>
<li>This seems to be what Eusebius means, when he says, that Divine providence does (among other things) <i xml:lang="grc">τοῖς εκτὸς συμβαίνουσι τῆν δέουσαν τάξιν ἀπονέμειν</i> “appoint a proper course even to those things which we call accidental.“</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Τὴν γὰρ οὐδένειαν τὴν ἐμαυτοῦ μετρεῖν ἔμαθον</i> “For I have learned what a mere nothing I am,” in Philo’s words.</li>
<li>The case here put may perhaps supply an answer to that, which is said in Mishnah masechet Berakhot <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">צועק לשעבר הרי זו תפלת שוא <abbr class="eoc">וכו׳</abbr></i> “It is a vain prayer, to cry out for what is already past.”</li>
<li>If Plato had not been born in the time of Socrates, in all probability he had not been what he was. And therefore, with Lactantius’s favor, he might have reason to thank God, <i xml:lang="la">quòd Atheniensis [natus esset], &amp; quòd temporibus Socratis</i> “that He was born at Athens, and in the days of Socrates." Just as M.<!-- ??? --> Antoninus ascribes, gratefully, to the Gods <i xml:lang="grc">τὸ γνώναι᾿ Αρολλώνιον, Ρούστικον, Μάξιμον</i> “that he was acquainted with Apollonius Maximus (his tutor) Apollonius and Rusticus.”</li>
<li>Plato and the Stoics, in Pseudo-Plutarch make fate to be <i xml:lang="grc">συμπλοκὴν ἀιτιῶν τεταγμένην, ἐν συμπλοκῇ καὶ τὸ παρ᾿ ἡμᾶς· ὥστε τὰ μὲν εἱμάρθαι, τὰ δ᾿ ἀνειμάρθαι</i> “a regular connection of causes, and those things, which are in our power, to belong to this connection. So that sone things are decreed, and some things not.”</li>
<li>The Heathen were of this Opinion: otherwise Homer could have had no opportunity of introducing their Deities as he does, <i xml:lang="grc">Τῷ δ᾿ ἂρ ἐπὶ φρεσὶ θῆκε θεὰ γλαυκῶπις Ἀθήνη· Ἀλλά τις ἀθανάτων τρέψε φρένας</i> “Minerva put it into their minds. But some God altered their minds;” and the like often. Plutarch explains these passages thus. <i xml:lang="grc">Οὐκ ἀναιροῦντα ποιεῖ [Ὄμηρος] τὸν θεόν, ἀλλὰ κινοῦντα τὴν προαίρεσιν· οὐδ᾿ ὁρμὰς ἐνεργαζόμενον, ἀλλὰ φαντασίας ὁρμῶν ἀγωγούς</i> “(Homer) does not make God to destroy the will of man, but only to move him to will; nor does he produce the appetites themselves in men, but only causes such imaginations as are capable of producing them.” And afterwards the Gods are said to help men, <i xml:lang="grc">τῆς ψυχῆς τὸ πρακτικὸν καὶ προαιρετικὸν ἀρχαῖς τισι καὶ φαντασίαις καὶ ἐπινοίαις ἐγείροντες ἢ τοὐναντίον ἀποστρέφοντες καὶ ἱστάντες</i> “by exciting the powers and faculties of the soul by oame secret principles, or imaginations or thoughts, or on the contrary, by diverting or stopping them.”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Σφαλεὶς [ὁ μειρακίσκος] οὐκ οἶδ᾿ ὅπως, ἐμοι μὲν τὸ φάρμακον, Πτοιοδώρῳ δὲ ἀφάρμακτον [κύλικα] ἐπέδωκα</i>, says Callidemidas, who designed the poison for Ptœodorus, in Lucian of Samosata.</li>
<li>When Hannibal was in sight of Rome, <i xml:lang="la">non ausus est obsidere</i> “he dared not besiege it” (<abbr>St.</abbr> Jerome). <i xml:lang="la">Sed religione quadam abstinuit, quod diceret, capienda urbis modo non dari voluntatem, modo non dari facultatem, ut testatur &amp; Orosius</i> “But forbore upon some religious scruple, because he said that sometimes he had no mind, and at other times no power to take the city, as is related also by Orofius” (Schol.<!-- ??? I couldn't find this quote on-line -->).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Non enim cuiquam in potestate est quid veniat in mentem</i> “For it is not in any man‘s power, what shall come into his mind” (<abbr>St.</abbr> Augustine)</li>
<li>They who called Simonides of Ceos out from Scopas and his company, as if it were to speak with him, saved his life. The story known.</li>
<li>They, who believe there is nothing but what they can handle or see (<i xml:lang="grc">οἱ οὐδὲν ἄλλο οἰόμενοι εἶναι ἢ οὗ ἂν δύνωνται ἀπρὶξ τοῖν χεροῖν λαβέσθαι… πᾶν δὲ τὸ ἀόρατον οὐκ ἀποδεχόμενοι ὡς ἐν οὐσίας μέρει</i> “and do not allow anything, that is invisible to have any real existence;” are by Plato reckoned to be void of all philosophy, <i xml:lang="grc">ἀμύητοι, σκληροὶ, ἀντιτυποι, μάλ᾿ εὖ ἄμουσοι</i><!-- paraphrase? --> “not so much as initiated, stupid, obstinate, and entirely illiterate.”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Ὀυχ ὁμοίως ἄνθρωπος ἀμύνεται καὶ θεός</i> “God does not afford assistance in the same manner as man does” (Philo Judaeus).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Si curent [Dij] homines, benè bonis sit, malè malis: quod nunc abest</i> “If they (the Gods) had any regard for men, things would go well with good men, and ill with bad men; but it is otherwise now” (in Cicero). The Jews, who call this case <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">צדיק ורע לו רשע וטוב לו</i> “evil to the righteous, and good to the wicked,” have written many things, about it, to be seen in their books: <i>Moreh Nevochim</i>, <i>Sefer ha-Ikkarrim</i>, <i>Menorath Hammaor</i> Nahh. ab.<!-- ??? --> <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> So have the Heathen philosophers too; Seneca, Plutarch, Plotinus, Simplicius, others. But the answers of neither are always just. God forbid that should be thought true, which is asserted by Glaucon, in Plato, that the just, if they had Gygess’s ring, would do as the unjust, and <i xml:lang="grc">ὅτι οὐδεὶς ἑκὼν δίκαιος ἀλλ' ἀναγκαζόμενος, <abbr class="eoc">κτλ.</abbr></i> “that no man is just voluntarily, but is forced to be so.” Or that in <i>Sefer Hasidim</i> and <i>Menorath Hammaor</i> <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">צדיק ורע לו צדוק בן רשע</i> “Evil befalls the righteous, and the unrighteous inherit good.” The reason assigned for this case in another place is something better: <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">כדי שלא יאמרו אם לא היה בטובה לא היה צדיק</i> “Wherefore let them not say, that if good does not befall such an one, then he is a wicked man.” But the way of solving it in <i>Nishmat Ḥayyim</i> by <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">גלגול הנשמות</i> “a revolution of souls,” or what the Kabbalists call <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">עיבור</i> “transmigration,” is worst of all.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Cadit &amp; Ripheus, justissimus unus Qui fuit in Teucris, &amp; servantissimus æqui. Dis aliter visum</i> “Ripheus also was slain, who was one of the most just men amongst the Trojans, and a very strict preserver of equity; but the Gods must be submitted to” (Virgil).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Virtutes ipsas invertimus</i> “We turn even virtues into vices” (Horace).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Οὐδὲν γὰρ οὕτως ἡδὺ τοῖς ἀνθρώποις, ὡς τὸ λαλεῖν τὰ ἀλλότρια· καὶ μάλιστα ἐὰν τύχωσιν ὑπ᾿ εὐνοίας τινὸς ἢ μίσους ἑλκόμενοι, ὑφ᾿ ὧν καὶ φιλεῖ κλέπτεσθαι ὡς τὰ πολλὰ ἡ ἀλήθεια</i> “There is nothing so delightful to men, as prating about things that don’t belong to them, especially if they are drawn into it by love or hatred, and they are apt to conceal truth as they do most other things” (Gregory Nazianzen).</li>
<li>Therefore, with Socrates in Plato, we ought not much to care what the multitude <i xml:lang="grc">[ὁι πολλὸι]</i> say of us, <i xml:lang="grc">ἀλλ᾿ ὅ, τι ό ἐπαίων περὶ τῶν δικαίων, καὶ άδίκων, ὁ εἶς, καὶ ἀυτὴ ὴ ἀλήθεια</i> “but what he says who can distinguish betwixt the just and the unjust, the only one who is truth itself.”</li>
<li>Or, vice-versa, he may judge that to be right, which is wrong. This seemss to be pretty much the case in that enumeration of good men, who suffered, in Cicero: <i xml:lang="la">Cur duo Scipiones, fortissimos &amp; oprimos viros, in Hispania Pœnus oppressit? Cur Maximus extulit filium consularem? Cur Marcellum Annibal interemit, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “How did it come to pass, that the Carthaginians overthrew the two Scipio’s in Spain, those brave and excellent men? How came Maximus to bury his son, when he was fit to be a consul? How came Hannibal to kill Marcellus? <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>” For here they are reckoned <i xml:lang="la">boni</i>, “good,” only because they were <i xml:lang="la">fortes</i>, “valiant;” that is, because they had been zealous and successful instruments in conquering and destroying them, who happened to be so unfortunate as to be neighbours to the Romans, upon various pretences indeed, but in truth only to enlarge their own territories. Is this to be good? Does it deserve such a particular observation, that Fabius Maximus buried a son, after he had been Consul too? How does it appear, that Marcellus was a better man than Hannibal? Is it such a wonder, if they, who spend their lives in slaughter, should at length be slain themselves? If the margin permitted, more remarks might be made upon this catalogue: as also some upon that, which follows in the same place, of others, <i xml:lang="la">quibus improbis optime evênit</i> “who, though they were very bad men, yet had very good fortune.”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Vitæ postscenia celant</i> “that part of life which they keep secret from the world” (in Lucretius) may be aptly applied to the wicked. <i xml:lang="la">Multi famam, conscientiam pauci verentur</i> “Many are afraid of common report, but few stand in awe of their own consciences” (Pliny, the younger).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Neq; mala vel bona, quæ vulgus putat: multi, qui conflictari adversis videntur, beati; ac pleriq; quanquam magnas per opes, miserrimi, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “We are not to judge things to be good or bad, from the opinion which the vulgar have of them; for abundance of people are happy, who have many difficulties to struggle with; and a great many men are very miserable, though they be very rich” (Tacitus).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Feliciorem tu Mecænatem putas, cui amoribus anxio, &amp; morosæ uxoris quotidiana repudia deflenti, somnus per symphoniarum cantum, ex longinquo bene resonantium, quæritur? Mero se licet spoiat,…; tam vigilabit in plumâ, quàm ille [Regulus] in cruce.… ut dubium [non] sit, an electione fati datâ, plures Reguli nasci, quàm Mecænates velint</i> “Do you think Mecænas was very happy, who was always solicitious about intrigues, and complaining of the refusals of an ill-natured wife, insomuch that he could have no other sleep, but what was procured by the agreeable sound of soft music, at a dislance. Though he dozes himself with wine,… he will be as restless in a bed of down, as (Regulus) upon a gibbet.… So that there is no doubt, but if fate would put it to men’s choice, there would more men choose to be born Regulus’s than Mecænas’s” (Seneca). <i xml:lang="la">Isti, quos prop felicibus aspicitis, si non qua occurrunt, sed qua latent, videritis, miseri sunt</i> “Those men which you look upon to be happy, if you were to see how different they are in private, from what they are in public, you would think miserable” (Seneca).</li>
<li>Archimedes, having found the way of solving a problem (<i xml:lang="la">examinandi, an corona aurea prorsus esset</i> “<abbr xml:lang="la">viz.</abbr> whether a crown was made of pure gold or no”) ran in an ecstasy out of the bath, crying <i xml:lang="grc">Εὕρηκα</i> “I have found out a solution;” but who ever heard of a man, that after a luxurious meal, or the enjoyment of a woman, ran out thus, crying out <i xml:lang="grc">Βέβρωκα</i> or <i xml:lang="grc">Πεφίληκα</i> “I have glutted myself; I have enjoyed her”? (Plutarch).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Fatis contraria fata rependens</i> “Balancing the loss determined by one fate, with the prospect of good determined by another” (Virgil). See what Pliny writes of Agrippa, the other great favonite and minister of Augustus, whom he reckons to be the only instance of felicity among them who were called Agrippæ. <i xml:lang="la">Is quoq; adversa pedum valetudine, misera juventa, exercito ævo inter arma mortesque,… infelici terris stirpe omni,… præterea brevitate ævi,… in tormentis adulteriorum conjugis, soceriq; prægravi servitio, luisse augurium præposteri natalis existimatur</i> “He also by a disease in his feet, by a miserable young time, having spent his years among arms and death,… all his relations miserable upon earth,… beside, his life very short,… it was the general opinion, that what his unnatural birth foreboded was fulfilled in the torments he endured by his wife’s adulteries, and the cruel bondage of his father-in-law.”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Ὀφθάλμων μὲν ἂμερσε δίδου δ᾿ ήδεῖαν άοιδήν</i> “The loss of his (Homer’s) eyes was compensated by the gift of sweet harmony” (Homer).</li>
<li>Zeno reckoned he made a good voyage, when he was ship-wrecked (Diogenes Laërtius).</li>
<li>If a good man labors under poverty, sickness, or the like, <i xml:lang="grc">εἰς ἀγαθόν τι τελευτήσει ζῶντι ἢ καὶ ἀποθανόντι</i> “it must end in something that is good; either in his lifetime or after death;” for how can he be neglected of God, who studies according to his poor abilities to be like Him? (Plato).</li>
<li>Who blames a drama, because all the persons are not heroes? (Plotinus).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">העולם נידון אחר רובו</i> “We must judge of the world, according to what it is as to the greatest part” (Abarbanel, and what follows).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Μέρος μὲν ἕνεκα ὅλου καὶ οὐχ ὅλον μέρους ἕνεκα ἀπεργάζεται, <abbr class="eoc">κτλ.</abbr></i> “The part is made for the sake of the whole, and not the whole for the sake of the part” (Plato).</li>
<li>Divine providence and the immortality of the soul must stand and fall together. <i xml:lang="grc">Θάτερον οὐκ ἔστιν ἀπολιπεῖν ἀναιροῦντα θάτερον</i> “If you take away the one, the other will follow” (Plutarch).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Τοῦτο ταυτόν ἐστι τὸ μὴ ὄιεσθαι εἶναι Θεον· ἢ ὄντα μὴ προνοεῖν· ἢ προνοοῦντα μἠ ἀγαθὸν εἶναι καὶ δίκαιον</i><!-- couldn't find this quote --> “It is the same thing to think there is no God, or if there be one, that he does not govern the world; or if he does govern it, he is not a good and just governor” (Hierocles).</li>
<li>Sure nobody ever did in reality pretend to do this. According to Diogenes Laërtius the Egyptians set up <i xml:lang="grc">ἀγάλματα</i> “some ornaments" in their temples, <i xml:lang="la">τῷ μὴ εἰδέναι τὴν τοῦ θεοῦ μορφήν</i>: for that very reason, because they did not know his shape; or, how to represent Him. Their images seem to have been symbols, or hieroglyphics, expressing something of their sense or opinion concerning Him. For, as Maimonides observes, no man ever did or ever will worship an idol, made of metal, stone, or wood, as that Being who made heaven and earth.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Non est dubium, quin religio nulla sit, ubicunq; simulachrum est</i> “Without doubt there can be no true religion, where there are any images” (Lactantius).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Ὡς γὰρ ἔργον σώματος τὸ σωματικῶς τι ἐπιτελέσαι, οὕτω καὶ ψυχῆς ἔργον τὸ ταῖς ἐννοίαις τὰς ἀρεσκούσας φαντασίας τελησιουργῆσαι ὡς θέλει, διὸ καὶ τὰς ἐννοίᾳ ἁμαρτίας μὴ ὡ; φαντασίας ἁπλῶς, ἁλλ᾿ ὡς ἔργα ἐν ψυχῇ γινόμενα δίκαιον κρίνεσθαι</i> “For as, when anything is done by the body, it is done grossly, so, when anything is done by the soul, it is done according to its own will, and by such representations as are agreeable to its thoughts; wherefore it is but reasonable to think, that sins in our thoughts are not mere imaginations only, but works really done in the soul” (<abbr>St.</abbr> Basil)</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Θεοπρεπῶς ἅπαντα νοοῦντες</i> “To think nothing but what is worthy of God" (<abbr>St.</abbr> Chrysostom)</li>
<li>We use them (and speak as the Jews everywhere inculcate, <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">כלשון בני אדם</i> “according to the language of men”) only <i xml:lang="grc">ἀπορία οἰκείας προσηγορίας·… τὰ ὀνόματα παῤ ἡμῖν ἀγαπώμενα μεταφέροντες</i><!-- couldn't find this quote --> “for want of proper words,… we convert our favorite words into metaphors” (Plotinus).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Mollissima corda Humano generi dare se natura fatetur, Quæ lachrymas dedit, hæc nostri pars optima sensûs.… separat hoc nos à grege mutorum, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “Nature confesses that she has given to mankind hearts that are very soft (and easy to be affected). She has given them tears, which are the best part of our senses… for these distinguish us from brute creatures” (Juvenal).</li>
<li>The ratio of G to M+q is different from that of G to M−q: and yet G remains unaltered.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Πῶς ἂν δοίη τῷ πρὸς τὰς όρμὰς ἀυτεξουσίῳ μὴ ἀιτοῦντι ὁ διδόναι πεφυκὼς θεός</i> “Why should God, who is in his own nature beneficent, give anything to a being whose appetites are in his own power, if he does not ask it?" (Hierocles).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Τῶν ἀρίστων οὐκ ἔστιν ἔπαινος, ἀλλὰ μεῖζόν τι καὶ βέλτιον</i> “Something greater and better, than praise, belongs to that which is perfectly good.” Therefore <i xml:lang="grc">ὁ Θεὸς καὶ τἀγαθὸν</i> “God and perfect goodness” are above praise (Aristotle).
<i xml:lang="grc">Οἱ τοὺς θεοὺς ἔπαινοῦντες γελοῖοι ἐισιν ἀυτοὺς ἐξισοῦντες</i> “They who praise the Gods, make themselves ridiculous, for that is to equal them with ourselves” (Andronicus of Rhodes).</li>
<li>Cleon, only a songster [<i xml:lang="grc">ἀιδὸς</i>], had a statue at Thebes, kept as sacred, when Pindar himself had none. See the story in Athenæus.</li>
<li>What Seneca says of Alexander, is true of many another hero: <i xml:lang="la">pro virtute erat felix temeritas</i> “that his successful rashness was esteemd virtue.”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Tumes alto Druforum sanguine, tanquam Feceris ipse aliquid, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “You puff yourself up, because you are of thenoble blood of the Drusi; as if you had done some (great) thing yourself” (Juvenal).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Gloria quantalibet quid erit, si gloria tantum est?</i> “What signifies the highest degree of glory, if it be only mere glory?” (Juvenal).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">היום כאן ומחר בקבר היום חי ומחר רימה</i> “Today here, and tomorrow in the grave; now a man, and then a worm” (<i>Sefer Hasidim</i>).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Κτῆμα σφαλερώτατον</i> “A very uncertain possession” (Philo Judaeus).</li>
<li>Even the great pyramid in Egypt, though it still remains, has not been able to preserve the true name of its builder; which is lost, one may justly wonder how.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Τά ὀνόματα τῶν πάλαι πολυυμνήτων νῦν τρόπον τινὰ γλωσσήματά ἐστι</i> “The names of those, who in former times were very much celebrated, are now some way or other become quite obsolete” (Marcus Aurelius).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Μικρὸν ἡ μηκίστη ὑστεροφημία, καὶ ἀυτὴ δὲ κατὰ διαδοχὴν ἀνθρωπαρίων τάχιστα τεθνηξομένων, καὶ οὐκ εἰδότων οὐδὲ ἑαυτούς, οὔτε γε τὸν πρόπαλαι τεθνηκότα</i> “The longest fame amongst posterity is but short, by reason of the quick succession by poor mortals dying, who know neither themselves, nor any that died some time ago” (Marcus Aurelius).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Expende Hannibalem: quot libras in duce summo Invenies?</i> “Weigh Hannibal in the scales, and see how many pounds there remain of that great commander” (Juvenal).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Μέχρι τοῦδε ὁι ἔπαινοι ἀνεκτοί ἐισιν, εἰς ὅσον ἂν ὁ ἐπαινούμενος γνωρίζῃ ἕκαστον τῶν λεγομένων προσὸν ἑαυτῷ· τὸ δὲ ὑπὲρ τοῦτο ἀλλότριον, <abbr>κτλ.</abbr></i> “Praises may be borne, so long as the person praised knows that all the things which are said belong to him, but all, that is beyond this is nothing to the purpose” (Lucian).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Μακαρίσασ ἀυτὸν [Ἀχιλλέα] ὅτι καὶ ζῶν φίλου πιστοῦ, καὶ τελευτήσας μεγάλου κήρυκος ἔτυχεν</i> “He esteemed him (Achilles) happy, because he had a faithful friend while living, and one that celebrated him highly after he was dead” (Plutarch).</li>
<li>As Psaphon was celebrated by the birds, singing <i xml:lang="grc">Μέγας θεὸς ψάφων</i> “Psaphon is a great God” (Maximus Tyrius).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="la">Honoribus aucti… cùm diis gratias agimus, tum nihil nostræ laudi assumptum arbitramur</i> “When honors are heaped upon us… and we return thanks to the Gods, we do not then take any of the merit to ourselves” (Cicero). <i xml:lang="grc">Ὄτι ἂν ἀγαθὸν πράττηις ἐις θεὸν ἀνάπεμπε</i> “When you do any good thing, ascribe it to God” (a saying of Bias in Diogenes Laërtius).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Εἰ γὰρ καὶ μὴ δυνάμεθα κατ αξίαν ποτὲ τοῦτο ποιῆσαι,… ἀλλ᾿ ὅμως τὴν κατὰ δύναμιν ἀνενεγκεῖν εὐχαριστίαν δίκαιον ἂν εἴη·</i> “For though we cannot do the thing as it ought to be done… yet it is but just and fit that we offer up our thanksgiving, so far as is in our power” (Johannes Chrysostomus).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">כל עובדי פסל: את פסיליהם היו עובדים</i> “all they who serve images, are worshippers of images,” &amp; similar passages. Deuteronomy 12 mention is made of the places, <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">אשר עבדו שם הגוים <abbr class="eoc">וכו׳</i></i> “where the nations served their images, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>” in the Chaldee paraphrase it is said <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">פלחו</i> “worshipped them;” and in the Septuagint it is said <i xml:lang="grc">ἐλάτρευσαν</i> “worshipped them” (in the ecclesiastical sense) and the same in the Vulgar Latin.</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">עבדו אב סלך בבל</i> “Serve the king of Babylon.”</li>
<li>Plato applies the word “serve” even to the laws themselves in that phrase, <abbr xml:lang="la">viz.</abbr> <i xml:lang="grc">δουλεύειν τοῖς νόμοις</i> “to serve the laws.”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Ἐκείνῳ οὐδὲν ἔξω φιλοδεσπότου γνώμης παρέξουσι</i> “We give no more to Him, than to one whom we freely acknowledge to have the dominion over us” (Philo Judaeus).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">משכיל יבין</i> “The wise will understand.”</li>
<li>Care must be taken how we pray, lest we should ask what may be hurtful to us. <i xml:lang="grc">Οὐχοῦν δοκεῖ πολλῆς προμηθείας γε προσδεῖσθαι, ὅπως μὴ λήσῃ τις αὑτὸν εὐχόμενος μεγάλα κακὰ, δοκῶν δ᾿ ἀγαθά</i> “for there seems to be need of great prudence, lest a man, by not rightly understanding himself, should ask for such things as he imagines to be good for him, but which are indeed great evils” (Plato). <i xml:lang="la">Evertere domos totas, optantibus ipsis, Di faciles, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i> “the Gods who are ready (to grant men’s petitions) have overthrown whole houses, at the request of the owners, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>” is a Poet‘s observation. The author of <i>Sefer Hasidim</i> adds, that we should not pray for that <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">שאי אפשר לעשות</i>, or <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">שאין נעשה כפי הפי הפבע</i>, or <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">שאיגו ראוי</i>, or <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">שיעשה הקב״ה נס בשנוי עולם</i> “which is not possible to be done, or which cannot be done according to the course of nature, or which is not fit to be done, or that the holy Being (God) should work a miracle and alter the world.”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">עיגי למטה לבי למעלה</i> “With my eyes downward, and my heart lifted up.”</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">התפלה… ענף מסתעף מן ההשגחה</i> “Prayer… is a branch of providence shading us” (Albo). <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">בהשגהה יאמין שהתפלה מועיל לו <abbr class="eoc">וכו׳</abbr></i> “He that believes in providence, must believe that prayer is profitable to him” (Albo).</li>
<li>Like those <i xml:lang="grc">Ἀκοιμητὰι</i> “wakeful people” at Constantinople particularly, who continued divine service night and day without intermission. Or the Messalians perhaps (<i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">מצלין</i>, <i xml:lang="grc">Ἐυχίται</i> “praying people”) who placed (or pretended to place) all religion in prayer; <i xml:lang="grc">μόνῃ σχολάζειν τῇ προσευχῇ προσποιούμενοι</i> “and so managed themselves, as never to be at leisure for anything else but prayer” (Cyril of Alexandria).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">כל תפלה שאינה בכוונה אינה תפלה</i> &ldquo;If a prayer is not performed with earnestness, it is no prayer” (Maimonides). <i xml:lang="he" dir="rtl">התפלה תלויה בלב</i> “A prayer suspended in the mind” (<i>Sefer Hasidim</i> and the like everywhere).</li>
<li>This in general is true: notwithstanding which I do not deny but there may be occasions, when <i xml:lang="grc">οὐδὲν κωλύει τόπος, οὐδὲ ἐμποδίζει καιρὸς, ἀλλὰ κᾂν γόνατα μὴ κλίνῃς,&hellip; διάνοιαν δὲ μόνον ἐπιδείξῃ θερμὴν, τὸ πᾶν ἀπήρτισας τῆς εὐχῆς· Ἔξεστι καὶ γυναῖκα ἠλακάτην κατέχουσαν καὶ ἱστουργοῦσαν ἀναβλέψαι εἰς τὸν οὐρανὸν τῇ διανοίᾳ, καὶ καλέσαι μετὰ θερμότητος τὸν Θεόν· ἔξεστι καὶ ἄνθρωπον εἰς ἀγορὰν ἐμβάλλοντα καὶ καθ᾿ ἑαυτὸν βαδίζοντα εὐχὰς ποιεῖσθαι ἐκτενεῖς, <abbr class="eoc">κτλ.</abbr></i> “the place is no hindrance, nor the time any interruption.&hellip; let him show a fervent affection of mind, for this is the perfection of prayer; and a woman, even while she is spinning or weaving, may in her thoughts look up to heaven and call upon God with fervency; and a man as he is going to market, and walking by himself, may pray very intentively” (<abbr>St.</abbr> Chrysostom).</li>
<li><i xml:lang="grc">Ὁ μὲν λόγος ἑρμηνὲυς διανοίας πρὸς ἀνθρώτσες· ή δὲ διάνοια γίνεται τῷ λόγῳ τὰ πρὸς τὸν θεόν</i> “Words are the interpreters of our thoughts to men, and we also make known our thoughts to God by words&rdquo; (Philo Judaeus).</li>
<li>Cogitation itself, according to Plato, is a kind of speech of the mind. For he calls <i xml:lang="grc">τὸ διάνοεῖσθαι</i> (cogitation) “or thinking,” <i xml:lang="grc">λόγον, ν αὐτὴ πρὸς αὑτὴν ἡ ψυχὴ διεξέρχεται, περὶ ὧν ἂν σκοπῇ</i> “the language by which the soul explains itself to itself, when it considers anything.&rdquo; And so Plotinus, <i xml:lang="grc">Ὀ ἐν φωνῇ λόγος μίμημα τοῦ ἐν ψυχῇ</i> “the vocal words are an imitation of those of the soul.”</li>
