<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Editor’s Note</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="editors-note" epub:type="z3998:editorial-note">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Editor’s Note</h2>
			<p>Wollaston usually gave very brief, obscurely-abbreviated sources for the quotations in his footnotes. <span epub:type="z3998:translator">John Clarke</span> translated these notes, but left their sources obscure. In many cases I have been able to track these down and expand them (thanks in part to Alexander Altmann, who identified many of the Hebrew sources in a 1948 paper for the Jewish Historical Society of England).</p>
			<p>Because of this, a note that originally read merely:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“<i xml:lang="la">Ubi virtus, si nihil situm est in ipsis nobis?</i> <abbr class="eoc">Cic.</abbr> <i dir="rtl" xml:lang="he">הוא עמוד התורה והמצוה … רשות לכל אדם נתונה אם רצה להטות עצמו לדרך טובה</i> <abbr class="eoc">Maim.</abbr> <i dir="rtl" xml:lang="he">הרשות היא הבחירה</i> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr class="eoc">Nahh. Ab.</abbr></i>”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Now reads, more helpfully:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“<i xml:lang="la">Ubi virtus, si nihil situm est in ipsis nobis?</i> ‘Where is virtue then, if there be nothing within our own power?’ (Cicero, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Academica</i>). <i dir="rtl" xml:lang="he">הוא עמוד התורה והמצוה … רשות לכל אדם נתונה אם רצה להטות עצמו לדרך טובה</i> ‘There is a power given to every man, if he be but willing to incline himself to the way that is good … This is the support of the law and the commandments.’ (Maimonides, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mishneh Torah</i>, Hilkot Teshubah, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, 1, 3). <i dir="rtl" xml:lang="he">הרשות היא הבחירה</i> ‘This power is what we call free will’ (Isaac Abravanel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Nahalot Abot</i>).”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>And this cryptic note:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“As that <i xml:lang="grc">Βλιτρι</i> <i xml:lang="la">ap.</i> <abbr class="name">Diog. L.</abbr> in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr xml:lang="la">v.</abbr><abbr class="name">Zen.</abbr></i>”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Becomes the more legible:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“As that word <i xml:lang="grc">Βλιτρι</i> (<i>Blitri</i>) in Diogenes Laërtius’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Zeno</i>, which word has no meaning at all.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>I do not know Greek, Latin, Hebrew, or Arabic, so it’s very likely that I have let some typos slip into these notes as I have transcribed them. I apologize and invite you to <a href="https://standardebooks.org/contribute/">report any errors you find to the Standard Ebooks team</a> so that they may be corrected.</p>
			<p>I have also made some changes to the original text in this edition: I have modernized archaic spellings and Americanized some English ones, have expanded some abbreviations, have adjusted punctuation and italicization to better conform to the expectations of modern readers, have added a few additional translations of non-English phrases, and have altered cross-references to use hyperlinks instead of page numbers.</p>
			<footer>
				<p>―<span epub:type="z3998:editor">David Gross</span>, 29 November 2016.</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
