<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IX: Truths Belonging to a Private Man, and Respecting (Directly) Only Himself</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="section-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Truths Belonging to a Private Man, and Respecting (Directly) Only Himself</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p id="p-1"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <i>Every man knows (or may<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-483" id="noteref-483" epub:type="noteref">483</a> know) best what his own faculties and personal circumstances are, and consequently what powers he has of acting and governing himself.</i> Because he only, of all mankind, has the internal knowledge of himself and what he is, and has the only opportunity, by reflection and experiments of himself, to find what his own abilities, passions, <abbr>etc.</abbr> truly are.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-484" id="noteref-484" epub:type="noteref">484</a></p>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <i>He that well examines himself, I suppose, will find these things to be true:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-485" id="noteref-485" epub:type="noteref">485</a></i></p>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<p>That there are some things common to him not only with sensitive animals and vegetables, but also with inanimate matter: as, that his body is subject to the general law of gravitation, that its parts are capable of being separated or dislocated, and that therefore he is in danger from falls and all impressions of violence.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>That there are other things common to him with vegetables and sensitive animals: as, that he comes from a seed (such the original animalculum may be taken to be); grows, and is preserved by proper matter, taken in and distributed through a set of vessels; ripens, flourishes, withers, decays, dies, is subject to diseases, may be hurt, or killed; and therefore wants, as they do, nourishment, a proper habitation, protection from injuries, and the like.</p>
				</li>
				<li id="li-3">
					<p>That he has other properties, common only to him and the sensitive tribe: as, that he receives by his senses the notice of many external objects and things; perceives many affections of his body; finds pleasure from some and pain from others; and has certain powers of moving himself and acting: that is, he is not only obnoxious to hurts, diseases, and the causes of death, but also <em>feels</em> them;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-486" id="noteref-486" epub:type="noteref">486</a> is not only capable of nourishment, and many other provisions made for him, but also <em>enjoys</em> them; and, besides, may contribute much, himself, to either his enjoyments or his sufferings.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>That beside these, he has other faculties⁠—which he does not apprehend to be either in the inert mass of matter, or in vegetables, or even in the sensitive kind, at least in any considerable degree⁠—by the help of which he investigates truth or probability, and judges whether things are agreeable to them or not, after the manner set down in <a href="section-3.xhtml">section <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></a>, or, in a word, that he is <i xml:lang="la">animal rationale</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-487" id="noteref-487" epub:type="noteref">487</a></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>That he is conscious of a liberty in himself to act or not to act, and that therefore he is such a being as is described in <a href="section-1.xhtml#s-1-p-2">section <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></a>: a being whose acts may be morally good or evil. Further,</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>That there are in him many inclinations and aversions, from whence flow such affections as desire, hope, joy, hatred, fear, sorrow, pity, anger, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, all which prompt him to act this or that way,</p>
				</li>
				<li id="li-7">
					<p>That he is sensible of great defects and limitations in the use of his rational faculties and powers of action, upon many occasions; as also, that his passions are many times apt to take wrong turns, to grow warm, irregular, excessive.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-488" id="noteref-488" epub:type="noteref">488</a> In other words, that he is, in many respects, fallible and infirm.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-489" id="noteref-489" epub:type="noteref">489</a></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Lastly, that he desires to be happy: as everything must, which understands what is meant by that word.</p>
				</li>
			</ol>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <i>If he does find those things to be so, then if he will act as he ought to do (that is, agreeably to truth and fact) he must do such things as these:</i></p>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<p>He must subject his sensual inclinations, his bodily passions, and the motions of all his members<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-490" id="noteref-490" epub:type="noteref">490</a> to reason, and try everything by it. For in the climax set down, he cannot but observe that as the principle of vegetation is something above the inertia of mere matter, and sense something above that again, so reason must be something above all these;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-491" id="noteref-491" epub:type="noteref">491</a> or, that his uppermost faculty is reason.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-492" id="noteref-492" epub:type="noteref">492</a> And from hence it follows, that he is one of those beings mentioned in <a href="section-3.xhtml#p-35">section <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span></a> and that the great law imposed upon him is to be governed by reason.</p>
					<p>Any man may prove this to himself by experiment, if he pleases. Because he cannot (at least without great violence to his nature) do anything if he has a greater reason against the doing of it than for it. When men do err against reason, it is either because they do not (perhaps <em>will not</em>) advert, and use their reason, or not enough; or because their faculties are defective.</p>
					<p>And further, by <a href="section-3.xhtml#p-32">section <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span></a>, to endeavor to act according to right reason, and to endeavor to act according to truth, are in effect the same thing. We cannot do the one, but we must do the other. We cannot act according to truth, or so as not to deny any truth⁠—and that is, we cannot act <em>right</em>⁠—unless we endeavor to act according to <em>right reason</em>, and are led by it.</p>
					<p>Therefore, not to subject one’s sensitive inclinations and passions to reason is to deny either that he is rational, or that reason is the supreme and ruling faculty in his nature: and that is to desert mankind,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-493" id="noteref-493" epub:type="noteref">493</a> and to deny himself to be what he knows himself, by experience and in his own conscience upon examination, to be, and what he would be very angry if anybody should say he was not.</p>
					<p>If a beast could be supposed to give up his sense and activity, neglect the calls of hunger and those appetites by which he (according to his nature) is to be guided, and, refusing to use the powers with which he is endowed in order to get his food and preserve his life, lie still in some place, and expect to grow and be fed like a plant, this would be much the same case, only not so bad, as when a man cancels his reason, and, as it were, strives to metamorphize himself into a brute. And yet, this he does, who pursues only sensual objects, and leaves himself to the impulses of appetite and passion. For as in that case, the brute neglects the law of his nature and affects that of the order below him, so does the man disobey the law of his nature and put himself under that of the lower animals, to whom he thus makes a defection.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-494" id="noteref-494" epub:type="noteref">494</a></p>
					<p>If this be so, how wretchedly do they violate the order of nature and transgress against truth, who not only reject the conduct of reason to follow sense and passion, but even make it subservient to them;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-495" id="noteref-495" epub:type="noteref">495</a> who use it only in finding out means to effect their wicked ends,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-496" id="noteref-496" epub:type="noteref">496</a> but never apply it to the consideration of those ends, or the nature of those means: whether they are just or unjust, right or wrong? This is not only to deviate from the path of nature, but to <em>invert</em> it, and to become something more than brutish⁠—<em>brutes with reason</em>⁠—which must be the most enormous and worst of all brutes. When the brute is governed by sense and bodily appetites, he observes his proper rule; when a man is governed after that manner, in defiance of reason, he <em>violates</em> his; but when he makes his rational powers to <em>serve</em> the brutish part⁠—to assist and promote it⁠—he heightens and increases the brutality, enlarges its field, makes it to act with greater force and effect,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-497" id="noteref-497" epub:type="noteref">497</a> and becomes a monster.</p>
					<p>His duty then, who is conscious to himself of the truth of those things recounted under the foregoing proposition, is to examine everything carefully, and to see that he complies with no corporeal inclination at the expense of his reason, but that all his affections, concupiscible and irascible, be directed towards such objects, and in such measure, time, and place, as that allows. Every word<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-498" id="noteref-498" epub:type="noteref">498</a> and action, every motion and step in life, should be conducted by reason.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-499" id="noteref-499" epub:type="noteref">499</a> This is the foundation, and indeed the sum, of all virtue.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>He must take care not to bring upon himself<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-500" id="noteref-500" epub:type="noteref">500</a> want, diseases, trouble; but, on the contrary, endeavor to prevent them, and to provide for his own comfortable subsistence, as far as he can without contradicting any truth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-501" id="noteref-501" epub:type="noteref">501</a> (that is, without denying matters of fact, and such propositions as have been already, or will in the sequel, here be shown to be true concerning God, property, the superiority of reason, <abbr>etc.</abbr>). To explain this limitation: if a man should consider himself as obnoxious to hunger, weather, injuries, diseases, and the rest; then, to supply his wants, take what is his neighbor’s property; and at last, in vindication of himself, say, “I act according to what I am, a being obnoxious to hunger, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and to act otherwise would be incompliance with truth;” this would not be sufficient to justify him. The grand rule requires that what he does should interfere with no truth, but what he does interferes with several. For by taking that which (by the supposition) is his neighbor’s, he acts as if it was not his neighbor’s but his own, and therefore plainly contradicts fact, and those truths in sections <a href="section-6.xhtml" epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</a> and <a href="section-7.xhtml" epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</a> respecting property: when by not taking what is his neighbor’s, he would contradict no truth, he would not deny himself to be obnoxious to hunger, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> There are other ways of furnishing himself with conveniencies, or at least necessaries, which are consistent with property and all truth, and he can only be said to deny himself to be what he is by omitting to provide against his wants when he omits to provide against them by some of <em>those ways</em>, and then indeed he does do it. (See the <a href="section-1.xhtml#p-56">answer to objection 3</a> above.)</p>
					<p>So again, when a man does anything to avoid present suffering or dangers <em>contrary</em> to the express dictates of reason and the tenor of forementioned truths, he acts as a sensitive being only, not as being what he really is: <i xml:lang="la">sensitivio-rationalis</i>. But when there is no good argument against his doing of anything that may gain him protection from evil, or a better condition of life, he may then look upon himself only as a being who needs that which is to be obtained by doing it; and in that case, if he should not do it, he would be false to himself, and deny the circumstances of his own nature.</p>
					<p>Certainly, when a man may, without transgressing the limits prescribed, consult his own safety, support, and reasonable satisfaction, and does not⁠—and especially when he takes a counter-course, and exposes himself<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-502" id="noteref-502" epub:type="noteref">502</a>⁠—he forgets many of the foregoing truths, and treats himself as not being what he is. This is true with respect to futurity, as well as the present time; and indeed, by how much future time is more than the present, by so much the more perhaps ought that to be regarded. At least enjoyments ought to be taken and adjusted in such a manner that no one should preclude or spoil <em>more or greater</em> to come.</p>
					<p>It may easily be understood here, that those evils which it is not in a man’s power to prevent, he must endeavor to bear patiently and decently, <abbr class="initialism">i.e.</abbr> as such; and moreover, such as are made by this means lighter<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-503" id="noteref-503" epub:type="noteref">503</a>⁠—for when they cannot be totally prevented, as much of the <em>effect</em> must be prevented, or taken off, as can be. And in order to this, it is good to be prepared for all attacks, especially the last great one.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-504" id="noteref-504" epub:type="noteref">504</a></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>He must consider even bodily and sensual affections, passions, and inclinations as intimations which <em>many times</em> he not only may, but ought to hearken to. What is said before of the subjection of passions and appetites to reason must always be remembered. They are not to proceed from unjustifiable causes, or terminate in wrong objects; not be unseasonable or immoderate. Being thus regulated, set to a true bias, and freed from all eruptions and violence, they become such as are here intended: gentle ferments working in our breasts without which we should settle in inactivity,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-505" id="noteref-505" epub:type="noteref">505</a> and what I think may be taken for just motives and good arguments to act upon.</p>
					<p>For if a man finds that he has not only a superior faculty of reason, but also an inferior appetitive faculty, under which are contained many propensions and aversions, these cannot be denied <em>to be</em> any more than that; though they must be taken indeed for what they <em>really are</em>, and not more. When they are checked by reason and truth, or there lies a reason against them (as there always will, when they are not within the foresaid restrictions), they must be taken as clogged with this circumstance, as things overruled and disabled; but when they are under no prohibition from the superior powers and truth, then they are to be considered as unfettered and free, and become governing principles. For (as it has been observed <a href="section-8.xhtml#p-33">upon a particular occasion before</a>), when there is no reason against the complying with our senses, there is always one for it by <a href="section-3.xhtml#p-46">proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>, section <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></a>; the inclination itself, being precluded by nothing above it, is in this case uppermost, and in course takes the commanding post, and then a man must act as being what he is in <a href="#li-3">number 3 under proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> of this section</a>.</p>
					<p>The springs of all human actions are in fact either a sense of duty, or a prospect of some pleasure or profit to be obtained, some evil or danger to be avoided; that is: either the reasonableness of what is done, or the manner in which something does or is like to affect the agent; and that is, again: human actions are founded either in reason, or passion and inclination. (I need not add they may be in both.) This being so, what should hinder, when reason does not work, but that the inferior springs should retain their nature, and act?</p>
					<p>Bodily inclinations and passions, when they observe their due subordination to reason, and only take place where that leaves it open for them, or allows them to be, as it were, assessors to it upon the throne, are of admirable use in life, and tend many times to noble ends. This is applicable to the irascible as well as the concupiscible affections, and the whole animal system. Love of that which is amiable, compassion<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-506" id="noteref-506" epub:type="noteref">506</a> toward the miserable and helpless, a natural abhorrence and resentment<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-507" id="noteref-507" epub:type="noteref">507</a> of that which is villainous or vicious or base,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-508" id="noteref-508" epub:type="noteref">508</a> fear<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-509" id="noteref-509" epub:type="noteref">509</a> of evils, are things which, duly tempered, have laudable effects, and without them mankind could not well subsist. By which it appears, that the Author of nature has placed these <i xml:lang="la">conatus</i>, these tendencies and reluctancies, in us to dispose us for action when there are no arguments of a higher nature to move us. So far are they, <em>rightly managed</em>, from being mere infirmities. And certainly the philosopher who pretends to absolute <em>apathy</em> maims nature, and sets up for a half-man, or I don’t know what.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-510" id="noteref-510" epub:type="noteref">510</a></p>
					<p>I must confess, however, that our passions are so very apt to grow upon us and become exorbitant, if they are not kept under an exact discipline, that by way of prevention or caution it is advisable rather to affect a <em>degree</em> of apathy, or to recede more from the worse extreme.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-511" id="noteref-511" epub:type="noteref">511</a> This very proposition itself, which, when reason is absent, places sense and inclination in the chair, obliges not to permit the reins to our passions or give them their full career, because, if we do, they may (and will) carry us into such excesses, such dangers and mischiefs, as may sadly affect the sensitive part of us: that part itself which now governs. They ought to be watched, and well examined: if reason is on their side, or stands neuter, they are to be heard (this is all that I say); in other cases we must be deaf to their applications, strongly guard against their emotions, and in due time prevent their rebelling against the sovereign faculty.</p>
					<p>I cannot forbear to add, though I fear I shall tire you with repetitions, that from what is said here, and just before, not only the liberty men take in preferring what they like best among present enjoyments, meats, drinks, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, so far as they are innocent, but all those prudential and lawful methods by which they endeavor to secure to themselves a comfortable and pleasant being, may be justified, and <a href="section-2.xhtml#p-29">that observation under proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span> in section <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></a> strengthened.</p>
					<p>If the gratification of an appetite be incompatible with reason and truth, to treat that appetite according to what it is, is to <em>deny</em> it; but if it is not, to use it as it is, is to consider it as an appetite clear of all objections, and this must be to <em>comply</em> with it. The humoring of such appetites, as lie not under the interdict of truth and reason, seems to be the very means by which the Author of nature intended to sweeten the journey of life, and a man may, upon the road, as well muffle himself up against sunshine and blue sky, and expose himself bare to rains and storms and cold, as debar himself of the innocent delight of his nature for affected melancholy, want, and pain. Yet,</p>
				</li>
				<li id="li-12">
					<p>He must use what means he can to cure his own defects, or at least to prevent the effects of them; learn to deny temptations, or keep them at a proper distance;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-512" id="noteref-512" epub:type="noteref">512</a> even mortify, where mortification is necessary;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-513" id="noteref-513" epub:type="noteref">513</a> and always carry about him the sense of his being but a man. He who does not do this, does not conform himself to <a href="#li-7">the seventh particular under the preceding proposition</a> (does not own that to be true, which he is supposed to have found true in himself), denies a defect to be what it is (to be something which requires to be supplied, or amended), and is guilty of an omission that will fall under <a href="section-1.xhtml#p-19">section <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span></a>.</p>
					<p>I might here mention some precautions with some kinds and degrees of mortification, or self-denial, which men will commonly find to be necessary. But I shall not prescribe: leaving them, who best know their own weak places and diseases, to select for themselves the proper remedies.</p>
					<p>I shall only take notice that, since the self-denial here recommended can only respect things in themselves lawful and not unreasonable, and in favor of such our bare inclinations have been allowed to be taken for arguments and directions, it looks as if this advice to deny one’s self or inclinations inferred a contradiction. But this knot will be quickly untied. For when we deny our inclinations in order to better our natures, or prevent crimes, though to follow those inclinations might otherwise be right, yet in these circumstances and under this view there arises a good reason against it, and they, according to the established rule, must therefore give way: which is all that is intended.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-514" id="noteref-514" epub:type="noteref">514</a></p>
					<p>The last clause of the proposition takes in a great compass. It will oblige men, if they do but think well what they are, and consequently what others of the same kind with themselves also are, not to be proud, conceited, vain; but modest, and humble, and rather diffident of themselves: not to censure the failings of others too hardly, not to be over-severe in punishing or exacting justice,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-515" id="noteref-515" epub:type="noteref">515</a> and particularly not to be revengeful; but candid, placable, mansuete; and so forth.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>He ought to examine<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-516" id="noteref-516" epub:type="noteref">516</a> his own actions and conduct, and where he finds he has transgressed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-517" id="noteref-517" epub:type="noteref">517</a> to repent. That is, if the transgression be against his neighbor, and the nature of it admits, to make reparation, or at least as far as he can; in other cases, when that which is done cannot be recalled, or repaired, or terminates in himself only, to live however under a sense of his fault, and to prove, by such acts as are proper, that he desires forgiveness, and heartily wishes it undone⁠—which is, as it were, an essay towards the undoing of it,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-518" id="noteref-518" epub:type="noteref">518</a> and all that now can be;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-519" id="noteref-519" epub:type="noteref">519</a> and lastly, to use all possible care not to relapse. All this is involved in the <em>idea</em> of a fault, or action that is wrong, as it presents itself to a rational mind. For such a mind cannot approve what is unreasonable and repugnant to truth⁠—that is, what is wrong, or a fault⁠—nay more, it cannot but disapprove it, detest it. No rational animal therefore can act according to truth⁠—the true nature of himself, and the idea of a crime⁠—if he does not endeavor not to commit it; and, when it is committed, to repair it, if he can, or at least show himself to be penitent.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-520" id="noteref-520" epub:type="noteref">520</a></p>
					<p>If, when a man is criminal, he does not behave himself <em>as such</em>, or, which is the same, behaves himself as being <em>not such</em>, he opposes truth confidently.</p>
					<p>And further, to act agreeably to what he is supposed to find himself to be, is to act as one who is in danger of relapsing: which is to be upon his guard for the future.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>He must labor to improve his rational faculties by such means as are (fairly) practicable by him and consistent with his circumstances. If it be a disadvantage to be obnoxious to error, and act in the dark, it is an advantage to know such truths as may prevent this; if so, it is a greater advantage to know, or be capable of knowing, more such truths;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-521" id="noteref-521" epub:type="noteref">521</a> and then again: not to endeavor to improve those faculties by which these truths are apprehended, is to shut them out, as being not what they are.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-522" id="noteref-522" epub:type="noteref">522</a></p>
					<p>And moreover, by the enlargement of our rational faculties we become more rational: that is, we advance our natures,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-523" id="noteref-523" epub:type="noteref">523</a> and become more attentive to rational enjoyments.</p>
					<p>The ordinary means indeed of improving our minds, are the instruction of able men, reading, observation, meditation. But every man has not proper opportunities or capacity for these, or but in some low degree, and no man is obliged beyond his abilities and opportunities (by <a href="section-4.xhtml#s-4-p-3">section <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></a>). Therefore, that mollification is added, “by such means,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
					<p>Besides health, a comfortable and suitable provision of externals is so necessary to the well-being of the whole man, that without it, the rational part cannot dwell easy, all pursuits of knowledge will be liable to interruption, and improvements (commonly) imperfect.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-524" id="noteref-524" epub:type="noteref">524</a> And so reason itself (which cannot betray its own interest) must, for its own sake, concur in seeking and promoting that which tends to the preservation and happiness of the whole. But the doing of this engrosses time and industry, and before that which is sought can be obtained (if it is ever obtained), probably the <em>use</em> of it is lost, except where men live by the profession of some part of learning.</p>
					<p>And as to them who are more free from worldly cares, or whose business and employment brings them into a stricter acquaintance with letters, after all their endeavors (such is the great variety of human circumstances in other respects), they must be contented with several <em>degrees</em> and <em>portions</em> of knowledge. Some are blessed with clean and strong constitutions, early instructions and other helps, succeeding encouragements, useful acquaintance, and freedom from disturbance; while others, under an ill state of body, or other disadvantages, are forced to be their own guides, and make their way as well as they can.</p>
					<p>But notwithstanding all this, every man may, in some degree or other, endeavor to cultivate his nature, and possess himself of useful truths. And not to do this is (again) to cast off reason (which never can be reasonable), apostatize from humanity, and recoil into the bestial life.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-525" id="noteref-525" epub:type="noteref">525</a></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>He must attend to instruction,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-526" id="noteref-526" epub:type="noteref">526</a> and even ask advice, especially in matters of consequence. Not to do this is to deny that his faculties are limited and defective, or that he is fallible (which is contrary to that which he is presumed to be conscious of), and perhaps that it is possible for another to know what he does not.</p>
					<p><em>Advice</em> every man is capable of hearing; and the meaner a man’s own improvements are, the more does truth press him to submit to the counsel and opinions of others. Nor is everyone only <em>capable</em>, but everyone <em>wants</em> upon some occasions to be informed. In how many country affairs must the scholar take the rustic for his master? In how many, other men of business, traders, and mechanics? And on the other side, in respect of how many things does the generality of the world want to be taught by them who are learned and honest?</p>
					<p>There is, or should be, a commerce or interchange of counsel and knowledge, as well as of other things: and where men have not these of their own growth, they should thankfully receive what may be imported from other quarters.</p>
					<p>I do not mean that a man ought implicitly and blindly to follow the opinion of another<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-527" id="noteref-527" epub:type="noteref">527</a> (this other being fallible too, as well as himself), unless he has in himself a good reason so to do, which many times happens; but by the assistance of another, and hearing what he has to say, to find out more certainly on which side reason, truth, and happiness (which always keep close together) do lie. And thus it is indeed a man’s <em>own reason</em> at last which governs.</p>
					<p>He who is governed by what another says (or does) without understanding it and making the reason of it his own, is not governed by his own reason, and that is, by no reason that he has. To say one is led by the nose (as we commonly speak<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-528" id="noteref-528" epub:type="noteref">528</a>) gives immediately the idea of a brute.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-529" id="noteref-529" epub:type="noteref">529</a></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Lastly: He must labor to clear his mind of those preoccupations and incumbrances which hang about it and hinder him from reasoning freely and judging impartially. We set out in life from such poor beginnings of knowledge, and grow up under such remains of superstition and ignorance, such influences of company and fashion, such insinuations of pleasure, <abbr>etc.</abbr> that it is no wonder if men get habits of thinking only in one way, that these habits in time grow confirmed and obstinate, and so their minds come to be overcast with thick prejudices, scarce penetrable by any ray of truth or light of reason. He, therefore, who would use his rational faculties, must in the first place disentangle them, and render them <em>fit</em> to be used; and he who does not do this, does hereby declare that he does not <em>intend</em> to use them: that is, he proclaims himself irrational, contrary to truth, if <a href="#li-12">supposition the fourth</a> be true.</p>
				</li>
			</ol>
			<p>The sum of all is this: it is the duty of every <em>man</em> (if that word expresses such a being as is before described) to behave himself in all respects (which I cannot pretend to enumerate) as far as he is able according to reason. And from hence it will follow, further, that,</p>
			<p id="p-5"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <i>Every man is obliged to live virtuously and piously.</i> Because to practice reason<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-530" id="noteref-530" epub:type="noteref">530</a> and truth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-531" id="noteref-531" epub:type="noteref">531</a> is to live after that manner. For, from the contents of the foregoing sections, it is apparent that one cannot practice reason (or act according to truth) without behaving himself reverently and dutifully toward that Almighty being on whom he depends, nor without justice and a tender regard to the properties of other men: that is, unless his enjoyments be free from impiety, virtuous, and harmless. And as to those virtues which respect a man’s self, the same thing<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-532" id="noteref-532" epub:type="noteref">532</a> will be as apparent when I have told what I mean by some of the principal ones.</p>
			<p><em>Prudence</em>, the queen of virtues, is nothing but choosing (after things<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-533" id="noteref-533" epub:type="noteref">533</a> have been duly weighed), and using the most reasonable means to obtain, some end that is reasonable. This is therefore <em>directly</em> the exercise of reason.</p>
			<p><em>Temperance</em> permits us to take meat and drink not only as physic for hunger and thirst, but also as an innocent cordial and fortifier against the evils of life, or even, sometimes, reason not refusing that liberty, merely as matter of pleasure. It only confines us to such kinds, quantities, and seasons, as may best consist with our health,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-534" id="noteref-534" epub:type="noteref">534</a> the use of our faculties,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-535" id="noteref-535" epub:type="noteref">535</a> our fortune, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and show that we do not think ourselves made only to eat and drink here;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-536" id="noteref-536" epub:type="noteref">536</a> that is, such as speak us to be what we are.</p>
			<p><em>Chastity</em> does not pretend to <em>extinguish</em> our tender passions, or cancel one part of our nature: it only bids us not to indulge them against reason and truth;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-537" id="noteref-537" epub:type="noteref">537</a> not give up the <em>man</em> to humor the <em>brute</em>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-538" id="noteref-538" epub:type="noteref">538</a> nor hurt others to please ourselves; to divert our inclinations by business, or some honest amusement, till we can gratify them lawfully, conveniently, regularly;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-539" id="noteref-539" epub:type="noteref">539</a> and even then to participate of the mysteries of love with modesty, as within a veil or sacred enclosure, not with a canine impudence.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-540" id="noteref-540" epub:type="noteref">540</a></p>
			<p><em>Frugality</em> indeed looks forward, and round about; not only considers the man himself, but compassionates his family; knows, that when the exactest computation is made that can be beforehand, there will still be found many unforeseen desiderata in the calendar of his expenses; is apprehensive of the world, and accidents, and new occasions, that may arise, though they are not yet in being;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-541" id="noteref-541" epub:type="noteref">541</a> and therefore endeavors wisely to lay in as much as may give him some kind of security against future wants and casualties, without which provision no man, whose sense is not quite lost or circumscribed within the present minute, can be very easy.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-542" id="noteref-542" epub:type="noteref">542</a> To this end, it not only cuts off all profusion and extravagance, but even deducts something from that which, according to the present appearance, might be afforded<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-543" id="noteref-543" epub:type="noteref">543</a>⁠—and chooses rather that he should live upon half allowance now, than be exposed (or expose anybody else) to the danger of starving hereafter,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-544" id="noteref-544" epub:type="noteref">544</a> when full meals and former plenty shall make poverty and fasting more insupportable. But still it forbids no instance of generosity, or even magnificence, which is agreeable to the man’s station and circumstances, or (which is tantamount) to the truth of his case.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-545" id="noteref-545" epub:type="noteref">545</a></p>
			<p>After the same manner, I might proceed upon other particular virtues. But my notion of them must by this time be sufficiently understood, and therefore I shall only give this general advice: That you may take the truer prospect of any act, place yourself in your imagination beyond it (beyond it in time), and suppose it already done, and then see how it looks⁠—always remembering that a long repentance is a disproportionate price for a short enjoyment. Or: fancy it done by some other man, and then view it in that speculum; we are commonly sharper-sighted in discerning the faults of others than of ourselves.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-546" id="noteref-546" epub:type="noteref">546</a> And further, as to those virtues which are said to consist in the mean, it may be sometimes safer to incline a little more to one of the extremes than to the other, as: rather to stinginess, than prodigality; rather to inflexibility and even a degree of ill nature, than to dangerous complaisance or easiness in respect of vice and such things as may be hurtful; and so on.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-547" id="noteref-547" epub:type="noteref">547</a></p>
			<p>Since, then, to live virtuously is to practice reason and act conformably to truth, he who lives so must be ultimately happy, by <a href="section-2.xhtml#p-31">section <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span></a>, and therefore not only the commands of reason, but even the desire of happiness (a motive that cannot but work strongly upon all who think) will oblige a man to live so.</p>
			<p>It may be collected, even from experience, that the virtuous life compared with the contrary (if one looks no further than the present state) is the happier life;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-548" id="noteref-548" epub:type="noteref">548</a> or, that the virtuous pleasures, when the whole account is made up, are the truer.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-549" id="noteref-549" epub:type="noteref">549</a> Who sees not that the vicious life is full of dangers and solicitudes, and usually ends ill: perhaps in rottenness and rags, or at least in a peevish and despicable discontent?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-550" id="noteref-550" epub:type="noteref">550</a></p>
			<p>I am not of opinion that virtue can make a man happy upon a rack,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-551" id="noteref-551" epub:type="noteref">551</a> under a violent fit of the stone, or the like;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-552" id="noteref-552" epub:type="noteref">552</a> or that virtue and prudence can always exempt him from wants and sufferings, mend a strait fortune, or rectify an ill constitution. Amidst so many enemies to virtue, so many infirmities as attend life, he cannot but be sometimes affected. But I have said, and say again, that the natural and usual effect of virtue is happiness, and if a virtuous man should in some respects be unhappy, yet still his virtue will make him <em>less unhappy</em>: for at least he enjoys inward tranquility, and a breast conscious of no evil. And which kind of life, I pray, ought one to prefer: that which naturally tends to happiness, though it may be disturbed, or that which naturally tends to unhappiness? In brief: virtue will make a man here, in any given circumstances, as happy as a man can be in those circumstances, or however it will make him happy hereafter in some other state: for ultimately, all taken together, happy he must be.</p>
			<p>Some may possibly wonder why, among virtues, I have not so much as once named one of the <em>cardinal</em>, and the only one perhaps which they pretend to: I mean <em>fortitude</em>. That that by which so many heroes have triumphed over enemies (even the greatest: death itself)⁠—that which distinguishes nations, raises empires, has been the grand theme of almost all wits, attracts all eyes, opens all mouths, and assumes the name of virtue by way of excellence⁠—that <em>this</em> should be forgot!</p>
			<p>To atone for this omission, I will make this appendix to the foregoing brief account: If <em>fortitude</em> be taken for natural courage (<abbr class="initialism">i.e.</abbr> strength, activity, plenty of spirits, and a contempt of dangers resulting from these), this is constitution and the gift of God,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-553" id="noteref-553" epub:type="noteref">553</a> not any virtue in us: because if it be <em>our</em> virtue, it must consist in something which we produce or do ourselves.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-554" id="noteref-554" epub:type="noteref">554</a> The case is the same with that of fine features and complexion, a large inheritance, or strong walls, which may indeed be great <em>advantages</em>, but were never called <em>virtues</em>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-555" id="noteref-555" epub:type="noteref">555</a> To <em>have these</em> is not virtue; but to <em>use them rightly</em>, or according to reason, if we have them.</p>
			<p>That this is justly said, may perhaps appear from what is to be said on the other side. It may be a man’s misfortune that he has not more courage, a greater stock of spirits, firmer health, and stronger limbs, if he has a just occasion to use them; but it never can be reckoned a vice or fault not to use what he has not: for otherwise it might be a crime not to be able to carry a ten thousand pound weight or outrun a cannonball.</p>
			<p>Fortitude considered as a virtue consists in standing and endeavoring to overcome dangers and oppositions, when they cannot be avoided without the violation of reason and truth. Here it is that he who is endowed with natural bravery, a healthful constitution, good bones and muscles, ought to use them, and be thankful to the Donor; and he, who is not so favored, must yet do what he can: if he cannot conquer, he must endeavor to be patient and prudent. And thus, he who is naturally timorous, or weak, or otherwise infirm, may have as much or more of the virtue of fortitude than the hero himself, who apprehends little and feels little, compared with the other, or possibly may find pleasure in a scene of dangerous action.</p>
			<p>If a man can prevent or escape any peril or trouble, <i xml:lang="la">salvâ veritate</i>, he ought to do it, otherwise he neither considers himself, nor them, as being what they are⁠—them not as unnecessary, himself not as capable of being hurt by them⁠—and so dashes against truth on the worse side.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-556" id="noteref-556" epub:type="noteref">556</a> But where that cannot be done, he must exert himself according to his abilities, whether great or little, and refer the success to the Divine providence. This is the true virtue of fortitude, which is nothing but <em>endeavoring</em> firmly and honestly to act as truth requires, and therefore is directly deducible from that notion on which we have founded the morality of human acts.</p>
			<p>It has for its object not only adversaries, noxious animals, and bold undertakings, but in general all the evils of life<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-557" id="noteref-557" epub:type="noteref">557</a> which a man must labor by prudence to ward off; and where this cannot be done, to bear with resignation, decency, and a humble expectation of an adjustment of all events in a future state: the belief of which I am now going to prove, in my manner, to be no vain nor groundless conceit.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <i>Everyone that finds himself, as before in <a href="#p-1">proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></a>, finds in himself at the same time a consciousness of his own existence and acts (which is life), with a power of apprehending, thinking, reasoning, willing, beginning and stopping many kinds and degrees of motion in his own members, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-558" id="noteref-558" epub:type="noteref">558</a> He who has not these powers, has no power to dispute this with me, therefore I can perceive no room for any dispute here, unless it be concerning the power of beginning motion. For they, who say there is always the same quantity of motion in the world, must not allow the production of any new, and therefore must suppose the animal spirits not to be put into motion by the mind, but only, being already in motion, to receive from it their directions into these or those canals, according as it intends to move this or that limb. But to this may be answered that if the mind can give these new directions and turns to the spirits, this serves my purpose as well, and what I intend will follow as well from it. And besides, it could not do this, if it could not excite those spirits being at rest.</p>
			<p>It is plain I can move my hand upward or downward or horizontally, faster or slower or not at all, or stop it when it is in motion, just as I will. Now if my hand, and those parts and spirits by which it is put into motion, were left to be governed by the law of gravitation, or by any motions already impressed upon them, the effects would be determined by rules of mechanism, and be necessary; the motion or rest of my hand would not attend upon my will and be alterable upon a thought at my pleasure. If, then, I have (as I am sensible I have) a <em>power of moving</em> my hand, in a manner which it would not move in by those laws that mere bodies already in motion or under the force of gravitation would observe, this motion depends solely upon <em>my will</em>, and <em>begins</em> there.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-559" id="noteref-559" epub:type="noteref">559</a></p>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <i>That, which in man, is the subject or suppositum of self-consciousness, thinks, and has the foresaid faculties, must be something different from his body or carcass.</i></p>
			<p>For, first, he does not, I suppose, find himself to think, see, hear, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <em>all over</em>, in any part of his body, but the seat of cogitation and reflection he finds in his <em>head</em>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-560" id="noteref-560" epub:type="noteref">560</a> and the nerves, by which the knowledge of external objects is conveyed to him, all tend to the same place. It is plainly something which resides there,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-561" id="noteref-561" epub:type="noteref">561</a> in the region of the brain, that by the mediation of these nerves governs the body and moves the parts of it (as by so many reins or wires),<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-562" id="noteref-562" epub:type="noteref">562</a> feels what is done to it, sees through the eyes, hears through the ears, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-563" id="noteref-563" epub:type="noteref">563</a></p>
			<p>Upon amputation of a limb<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-564" id="noteref-564" epub:type="noteref">564</a> this thing (whatever it is) is not found to be diminished,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-565" id="noteref-565" epub:type="noteref">565</a> nor any of its faculties lost. Its sphere of acting, while it is confined to the body, is only contracted, and part of its instrument lost. It cannot make use of that which is not, or which it has not.</p>
			<p>If the eyes be shut, or the ears stopped, it cannot then see, or hear⁠—but remove the obstruction, and it instantly appears that the faculty by which it apprehends the impressions made upon the organs of sensation, remained all that while entire: and that so it might have done if the eyes, or ears, had never been opened again, or if the eyes had been out, or the ears quite disabled. This shows, in general, that when any sense or faculty seems to be impaired or lost⁠—by any bodily hurt, after a fever, or through age⁠—this does not come to pass because it is <em>the body</em> that perceives and has these faculties in itself, but because the body loses its <em>instrumentality</em>, and gives that which is the true subject of these faculties no opportunity of exerting them, or of exerting them well, though it retains them as much as in the case before, when the eyes or ears were only shut.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-566" id="noteref-566" epub:type="noteref">566</a> Thus distinct are it and its faculties from the body and its affections. I will now call it the “soul.”</p>
			<p>Again, as a man peruses and considers his own body, does it not undeniably appear to be something different from the considerer? And when he uses this expression “my body,” or “the body of me,” may it not properly be demanded: who is meant by “me,” or what “my” relates to? It cannot be the body itself; that cannot say of itself, “it is my body,” or “the body of me.” And yet this way of speaking we naturally fall into, from an inward and habitual sense of ourselves and what we are, even though we do not advert upon it.</p>
			<p>What I mean is this: A man being supposed a person consisting of two parts⁠—soul and body⁠—the whole person may say of this or that part of him, “the soul of me” or “the body of me,” but if he was either all soul, or all body, and nothing else, he could not then speak in this manner, because it would be the same as to say “the soul of the soul,” or “the body of the body,” or “the I of me.” The pronoun therefore (in that saying “my body,” or “the body of me”) must stand for something else, to which the body belongs,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-567" id="noteref-567" epub:type="noteref">567</a> or at least for something of which it is only a part, <abbr>viz.</abbr> the person of the whole man.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-568" id="noteref-568" epub:type="noteref">568</a> And then even this implies that there is another part of him, which is not body.</p>
			<p>It is plain there are two different interests in men<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-569" id="noteref-569" epub:type="noteref">569</a>⁠—on the one side reason, on the other passion⁠—which, being many times directly opposite, must belong to different subjects. There are, upon many occasions, contests and, as it were, wars between the mind and the body: so far are they from being the same thing.</p>
			<p>Lastly, there is, we may perceive, something within us which supports the body (keeps it up), directs its motion for the better preservation of it when any hurts or evils befall it, finds out the means of its cure, and the like; without which, it would fall to the ground and undergo the fate of common matter. The body, therefore, must be considered as being under the direction and tuition of some other thing, which is (or should be) the governor of it, and consequently upon this account must be concluded to be different from it.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <i>The soul cannot be mere matter.</i> For if it is, then either <em>all matter</em> must think, or the difference must arise from the different modification, magnitude, figure, or motion<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-570" id="noteref-570" epub:type="noteref">570</a> of some parcels of matter in respect of others, or a faculty of thinking must be superadded to some systems of it which is not superadded to others. But,</p>
			<p>In the first place, that position which makes all matter to be cogitative is contrary to all the apprehensions and knowledge we have of the nature of it; nor can it be true, unless our senses and faculties be contrived only to deceive us. We perceive not the least symptom of cogitation or sense in our tables, chairs, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			<p>Why does the scene of thinking lie in our heads, and all the ministers of sensation make their reports to something there, if <em>all</em> matter be apprehensive and cogitative? For in that case, there would be as much thought and understanding in our heels, and everywhere else, as in our heads.</p>
			<p>If all matter be cogitative, then it must be so <i xml:lang="la">quatenùs</i> matter, and thinking must be of the essence and definition of it; whereas, by “matter” no more is meant but a substance extended and impenetrable to other matter. And since, for this reason, it cannot be necessary for matter to think (because it may be matter without this property), it cannot think as matter only.</p>
			<p>If it did, we should not only continue to think always, till the matter of which we consist is annihilated (and so the assertor of this doctrine would stumble upon immortality unawares), but we must also have thought always in time past, ever since that matter was in being; nor could there be any the least intermission of actual thinking, which does not appear to be our case.</p>
			<p>If thinking, self-consciousness, <abbr>etc.</abbr> were essential to matter, <em>every part</em> of it must have them: and then no <em>system</em> could have them. For a system of material parts would be a system of things, conscious every one by itself of its own existence and individuality, and consequently thinking by itself: but there could be no <em>one act</em> of self-consciousness or thought common to the whole. Juxtaposition in this case could signify nothing; the distinction and individuation of the several particles would be as much retained in their vicinity as if they were separated by miles.</p>
			<p>In the next place, the faculties of thinking, <abbr>etc.</abbr> cannot arise from the size, figure, texture, or motion of it, because bodies by the alteration of these only become greater or less; round or square, <abbr>etc.</abbr>; rare, or dense; translated from one place to another, with this or that new direction or velocity; or the like: all which ideas are quite different from that of thinking; there can be no relation between them.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-571" id="noteref-571" epub:type="noteref">571</a> These modifications and affections of matter are so far from being principles or causes of thinking and acting, that they are themselves but effects, proceeding from the action of some other matter or thing upon it, and are proofs of its passivity, deadness, and utter incapacity of becoming cogitative. This is evident to sense.</p>
			<p>They who place the essence of the soul in a certain motion given to some matter (if any such men there really be) should consider, among many other things, that to move the body spontaneously is one of the faculties of the soul,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-572" id="noteref-572" epub:type="noteref">572</a> and that this, which is the same with the power of beginning motion, cannot come from motion already begun, and impressed <i xml:lang="la">ab extra</i>.</p>
			<p>Let the materialist examine well whether he does not feel something within himself that acts from an internal principle; whether he does not experience some liberty, some power of governing himself and choosing; whether he does not enjoy a kind of invisible empire, in which he commands his own thoughts, sends them to this or that place, employs them about this or that business,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-573" id="noteref-573" epub:type="noteref">573</a> forms such and such designs and schemes; and whether there is anything like this in bare matter,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-574" id="noteref-574" epub:type="noteref">574</a> however fashioned or proportioned, which, if nothing should protrude or communicate motion to it, would forever remain fixed to the place where it happens to be, an eternal monument of its own being dead. Can such an active being as the soul is,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-575" id="noteref-575" epub:type="noteref">575</a> the subject of so many powers, be itself nothing but an accident?</p>
			<p>When I begin to move myself, I do it for some reason, and with respect to some end, the means to effect which, I have, if there be occasion for it, concerted within myself: and this does not at all look like motion <em>merely material</em> (or, in which matter is only concerned), which is all mechanical. Who can imagine matter to be moved by arguments, or ever placed syllogisms and demonstrations among levers and pulleys?</p>
			<p>We not only move ourselves upon reasons which we find in ourselves, but upon reasons imparted by words or writing from others, or perhaps merely at their desire or bare suggestion. In which case, again, nobody sure can imagine that the words spoken or written (the sound in the air, or the strokes on the paper) can by any natural or mechanical efficience cause the reader or hearer to move in any determinate manner (or at all). The reason, request, or friendly admonition, which is the true motive, can make no impression upon matter. It must be some other kind of being that apprehends the force and sense of them.</p>
			<p>Do not we see in conversation how a pleasant thing said makes people break out into laughter, a rude thing into passion, and so on? These affections cannot be the physical effects of the words spoken, because then they would have the same effect whether they were understood or not. And this is further demonstrable from hence: that though the words do really contain nothing which is either pleasant, or rude (or perhaps words are thought to be spoken, which are not spoken), yet if they are <em>apprehended</em> to do that, or the sound to be otherwise than it was, the effect will be the same. It is therefore the <em>sense</em> of the words, which is an immaterial thing, that, by passing through the understanding and causing that which is the subject of the intellectual faculties to influence the body, produces these motions in the spirits, blood, muscles.</p>
			<p>They who can fancy that matter may come to live, think, and act spontaneously⁠—by being reduced to a certain magnitude, or having its parts placed after a certain manner, or being invested with such a figure, or excited by such a particular motion⁠—they, I say, would do well to discover to us that degree of fineness, that alteration in the situation of its parts, <abbr>etc.</abbr> at which matter may begin to find itself alive and cogitative, and which is the critical minute that introduces these important properties. If they cannot do this, nor have their eye upon any particular crisis, it is a sign they have no good reason for what they say. For if they have no reason to charge this change upon any particular degree or difference, one more than another, they have no reason to charge it upon any degree or difference at all, and then they have no reason by which they can prove that such a change is made at all. Besides all which, since magnitude, figure, motion are but <em>accidents</em> of matter, not matter, and only the substance is truly matter; and since the substance of any one part of matter does not differ from that of another, if any matter can be by nature cogitative, all must be so. But this we have seen cannot be.</p>
			<p>So then in conclusion, if there is any such thing as matter that thinks, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, this must be a particular privilege granted to it, that is: a faculty of thinking must be <em>superadded</em> to certain parts or parcels of it. Which, by the way, must infer the existence of some Being able to confer this faculty, who, when the ineptness of matter has been well considered, cannot appear to be less than omnipotent, or God. But the truth is, matter seems not to be capable of such improvement: of being made to think. For since it is not the essence of matter, it cannot be made to be so without making matter another kind of substance from what it is. Nor can it be made to arise from any of the modifications or accidents of matter⁠—and in respect of what else can any matter be made to differ from other matter?</p>
			<p>The accidents of matter are so far from being made by any power to produce cogitation, that some <em>even of them</em> show it incapable of having a faculty of thinking superadded. The very <em>divisibility</em> of it does this. For that which is made to think must either be one part, or more parts joined together. But we know no such thing as a part of matter purely one (or indivisible). It may indeed have pleased the Author of nature that there should be atoms whose parts are actually indiscerptible, and which may be the principles of other bodies⁠—but still they consist of parts, though firmly adhering together. And if the feat of cogitation be in more parts than one (whether they lie close together, or are loose, or in a state of fluidity, it is the same thing), how can it be avoided, but that either there must be so many several minds, or thinking substances, as there are parts (and then the consequence, which has been mentioned, would return upon us again); or else, that there must be something else superadded for them to center in, to unite their acts, and make their thoughts to be one? And then what can this be, but some other substance which is purely one?</p>
			<p>Matter by itself can never entertain <em>abstracted</em> and <em>general</em> ideas, such as many in our minds are.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-576" id="noteref-576" epub:type="noteref">576</a> For could it reflect upon what passes within itself, it could possibly find there nothing but material and particular impressions; abstractions and metaphysical ideas could not be printed upon it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-577" id="noteref-577" epub:type="noteref">577</a> How could one abstract <em>from matter</em> who is himself nothing <em>but matter</em>? And then, as to material images themselves, which are usually supposed to be impressed upon the brain (or some part of it), and stock the fantasy and memory, that which peruses the impressions and traces there (or anywhere) must be something distinct from the brain, or that upon which these impressions are made: otherwise it must contemplate itself, and be both reader and book. And this other distinct contemplating being cannot be merely corporeal, any more than the body can perceive and think without a soul. For such a corporeal being must require sense, and suitable organs to perceive and read these characters and vestigia of things, and so another organized body would be introduced, and the same questions and difficulties redoubled concerning the soul of that body and its faculties.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-578" id="noteref-578" epub:type="noteref">578</a></p>
			<p>If my soul was mere matter, external visible objects could only be perceived within me according to the impressions they make upon matter, and not otherwise. <abbr class="initialism">E.g.</abbr> the image of a cube in my mind (or my idea of a cube) must be always under some particular prospect, and conform to the rules of perspective, nor could I otherwise represent it to myself; whereas now I can form an idea of it as it is <em>in itself</em>, and almost view all its <i xml:lang="la">hedræ</i> at once⁠—as it were, encompassing it with my mind.</p>
			<p>I can, within myself, correct the external appearances and impressions of objects, and advance, upon the reports and hints received by my senses, to form ideas of things that are <em>not extant</em> in matter. By seeing a material circle I may learn to form the idea of a circle, or figure generated by the revolution of a ray about its center; but then, recollecting what I know of matter upon other occasions, I can conclude there is no exact material circle. So that I have an idea, which perhaps was raised from the hints I received from without, but is not truly to be found there. If I see a tower at a great distance, which according to the impressions made upon my material organs seems little and round, I do not therefore conclude it to be either: there is something within that reasons upon the circumstances of the appearance, and, as it were, commands my sense, and corrects the impression; and this must be something superior to matter, since a <em>material soul</em> is no otherwise impressible itself, but as <em>material organs</em> are. Instances of this kind are endless. (See <a href="section-3.xhtml#p-42">section <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span></a>.)</p>
			<p>If we know anything of matter, we know that by itself it is a lifeless thing⁠—inert, and passive only⁠—and acts <em>necessarily</em> (or rather is acted) according to the laws of motion and gravitation. This passiveness seems to be essential to it. And if we know anything of ourselves, we know that we are conscious of our own existence and acts (<abbr class="initialism">i.e.</abbr> that we live), that we have a degree of freedom, that we can move ourselves spontaneously, and, in short, that we can, in many instances, take off the effect of gravitation and impress new motions upon our spirits (or give them new directions) only by a thought. Therefore, to make mere matter do all this is to change the nature of it: to change death into life, incapacity of thinking into cogitativity, necessity into liberty. And to say that God may superadd a faculty of thinking, moving itself, <abbr>etc.</abbr> to matter⁠—if by this be meant that he may make matter to be the suppositum of these faculties (that substance, in which they inhere)⁠—is the same in effect as to say that God may superadd a faculty of thinking to incogitativity, of acting freely to necessity, and so on. What sense is there in this? And yet so it must be, while matter continues to be matter.</p>
			<p>That faculty of thinking, so much talked of by some as superadded to certain <em>systems</em> of matter, fitly disposed, by virtue of God’s omnipotence, though it be so called, must in reality amount to the same thing as another <em>substance</em> with the faculty of thinking. For a faculty of thinking alone will not make up the idea of a human soul, which is endowed with many faculties⁠—apprehending, reflecting, comparing, judging, making deductions and reasoning, willing, putting the body in motion, continuing the animal functions by its presence, and giving life⁠—and therefore, whatever it is that is superadded, it must be something which is endowed with all those other faculties. And whether that can be a faculty of thinking, and so these other faculties be only faculties of a faculty,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-579" id="noteref-579" epub:type="noteref">579</a> or whether they must not all be rather the faculties of some substance,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-580" id="noteref-580" epub:type="noteref">580</a> which, being (by their own concession) superadded to matter, must be different from it, I do leave the unprejudiced to determine.</p>
			<p id="p-50">If men would but seriously look into themselves, I am persuaded the soul would not appear to them as a <em>faculty</em> of the body, or kind of <em>appurtenance</em> to it, but rather as some <em>substance</em>, properly placed in it, not only to use it as an instrument, and act by it, but also to govern it (or the parts of it; as the tongue, hands, feet, <abbr>etc.</abbr>) according to its own reason. For I think it is plain enough that the mind, though it acts under great limitations, does however in many instances govern the body arbitrarily⁠—and it is monstrous to suppose this governor to be nothing but some fit disposition or accident (superadded) of that matter which is governed. A ship, it is true, would not be fit for navigation if it was not built and provided in a proper manner, but then, when it has its proper form, and is become a system of materials fitly disposed, it is not this <em>disposition</em> that governs it. It is the man⁠—that other substance⁠—who sits at the helm, and they who manage the sails and tackle, that do this. So <em>our vessels</em>, without a proper organization and conformity of parts, would not be capable of being acted as they are; but still it is not the shape, or modification, or any other accident, that can govern them. The <em>capacity</em> of being governed or used can never be the <em>governor</em> applying and using<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-581" id="noteref-581" epub:type="noteref">581</a> that capacity. No, there must be at the helm something distinct that commands the body, and without which it would run adrift, or rather sink.</p>
			<p>For the foregoing reasons, it seems to me that matter cannot think; cannot <em>be made</em> to think. But if a faculty of thinking can be superadded to a system of matter, without uniting an immaterial substance to it<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-582" id="noteref-582" epub:type="noteref">582</a>⁠—I say, if this can be, yet a human body is not such a system: being plainly void of thought, and organized in such a manner as to transmit the impressions of sensible objects up to the brain, where the percipient, and that which reflects upon them, certainly resides; and therefore that, which there apprehends, thinks, and wills, must be that system of matter to which a faculty of thinking is superadded. All the premises then well considered, judge I beseech you whether instead of saying that this inhabitant of our heads (the soul) is a system of matter to which a faculty of thinking is superadded, it might not be more reasonable to say, it is “a thinking substance intimately united to some fine material vehicle, which has its residence in the brain.” Though I understand not perfectly the manner how a cogitative and spiritual substance can be thus closely united to such a material vehicle, yet I can understand this union as well, as how it can be united to the body in general (perhaps, as how the particles of the body itself cohere together), and much better than how a thinking faculty can be superadded to matter. And besides, several phenomena may more easily be solved by this hypothesis, which (though I shall not pertinaciously maintain it) in short is this: <abbr>viz.</abbr> that the human soul is a cogitative substance, clothed in a material vehicle, or rather united to it, and as it were inseparably mixed (I had almost said “incorporated”) with it;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-583" id="noteref-583" epub:type="noteref">583</a> that these act in conjunction, that which affects the one affecting the other; that the soul is detained in the body (the head or brain) by some sympathy or attraction between this material vehicle and it, till the habitation is spoiled, and this mutual tendency interrupted (and perhaps turned into an aversion, that makes it fly off) by some hurt or disease, or by the decays and ruins of old age, or the like, happening to the body; and that in the interim, by means of this vehicle motions and impressions are communicated to and fro. But of this perhaps something more by and by.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. <i>The soul of man subsists after the dissolution of his body</i> or, <i>is immortal.</i> For,</p>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<p>If it is immaterial, it is indiscerptible, and therefore incapable of being dissolved or demolished, as bodies are.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-584" id="noteref-584" epub:type="noteref">584</a> Such a being can only perish by annihilation: that is, it will continue to subsist and live if some other being, able to do this, does not by a particular act annihilate it. And, if there is any reason to believe that at the death of every man there is always such a particular annihilation, let him that knows it produce it. Certainly to reduce any substance into nothing requires just the same power as to convert nothing into something: and, I fancy, they who deny the immortality of the soul will be cautious how they admit any such power.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>If the soul could be material⁠—that is, if there could be any matter that might be the subject of those faculties of thinking, willing, <abbr>etc.</abbr>⁠—yet still, since we cannot but be sensible that all these are faculties of the selfsame thing, and that all the several acts of the mind are acts of the same thing, each of them individual and truly one; I say, since it is so, this matter must be so perfectly united in itself, so absolutely one, as no matter knowable by us can be. And then the least that can be allowed is that it should be truly solid, and not actually divisible: that is, such as no natural cause could destroy.</p>
					<p>To introduce matter with a faculty of thinking, or a “thinking matter,” is to introduce matter with a new and opposite property, and that is to introduce a new species of matter<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-585" id="noteref-585" epub:type="noteref">585</a> which will differ as essentially from the other, common, unthinking kind, as any species whatsoever does from its opposite in <i xml:lang="la">scala prædicamentali</i>; even as body does from spirit. For thinking and unthinking differ as corporeal and incorporeal. And if so, this “thinking matter” must always continue to think, till either it is annihilated, or there is a transmutation of one species into another: and to take refuge in either of these expectations is at least to expect omnipotence should interpose to help out a bad cause.</p>
					<p>If anyone should say that God might, by virtue of his omnipotence, superadd to certain parcels of matter a fourth dimension, I should not perhaps dispute the Divine power, but I might say that such matter, existing under four dimensions, would essentially differ from that which cannot exist under four, or which can exist but only under three, and that this four-dimensioned matter must always remain such, because no substance can be changed into or become another, essentially different, nor do we know of any that by the course of nature ceases totally to be, or is reduced to nothing.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The next argument shall proceed by way of objection and answer, because a removal of the principal objection against anything is a good argument for it. Objection: It seems as if <em>thinking</em> was not essential to the soul, but rather a <em>capacity of thinking</em> under certain circumstances. For it does not think when it lies concealed in the primitive rudiment of the man, in the womb, perhaps in the beginnings of infancy, in sleep, in a swoon; and the reason of this seems to lie in the circumstances of the body, which either is not sufficiently attended and prepared, or for a while employs the spirits wholly in the digestion of its aliment and other offices in the animal economy, or by some external attack, or the working of some enemy got into it has its parts disordered and the passages so possessed that the blood and other fluids can scarce break through, or after some such manner is preternaturally affected. And therefore, the question to be resolved is not whether the soul is material or immaterial, and much less whether it will be annihilated at death, but whether that soul (be it what it will), which ceases to think when the body is not fitly disposed, can think at all when the body is quite dissolved and leaves the soul no opportunity of actuating it any more or operating by it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-586" id="noteref-586" epub:type="noteref">586</a> Answer: If this objection cannot be fully answered, till we know more of the nature of beings, and of that <i xml:lang="la">vinculum</i> by which the soul and body are connected, than we do at present, it must not therefore be looked upon as certainly unanswerable in itself; and much less, if only it cannot be answered <em>by me</em>. It may perhaps be possible to turn it even into an argument for the immortality of the soul.</p>
					<p>The soul, it cannot be denied, is a limited being, or a being which acts under limitations. These limitations at different times are different; its activity and faculties being more obstructed or clogged at one time than another, and most of all in sleep, or a deliquium. As these obstructions are removed, it acts more clearly and freely, and therefore if the state of the soul in the body (its confinement there) may be considered as one general and great limitation, why, when this limitation shall be taken off (this great obstruction removed), may it<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-587" id="noteref-587" epub:type="noteref">587</a> not be allowed to act with still greater freedom and clearness: the greatest it is capable of? While it remains in the brain, it can, as it were, look out at a few apertures: that is, receive the notices of many things by those nerves and organs which are the instruments of sensation; but if any of those avenues to it be stopped, that branch of its knowledge is for a time cut off. If those tracks in the brain, or those marks, whatever they are and wherever they are imprinted, upon which our memory and images of things seem to depend, are filled up or overcast by any vapor, or otherwise darkened, it can read them no more till the cloud is dispersed. (For it cannot read what is not legible, and indeed for the present not there.) And since even in abstracted reflections the mind is obliged to make use of words,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-588" id="noteref-588" epub:type="noteref">588</a> or some kind of signs, to fix its ideas and to render them tractable and stable enough to be perused, compared, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and this kind of language depends upon memory, while this is intermitted, the use of the other is taken away, with all that depends upon it. This is the present state of the soul, and from hence the reason appears in some measure: why we do not think in sound sleep, <abbr>etc.</abbr>; but it does not follow from hence, that the soul cannot subsist and act under more enlarged circumstances. That, which being confined to the body, and able to act only according to the opportunities this affords, can now perceive visible objects only with two eyes (at two windows<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-589" id="noteref-589" epub:type="noteref">589</a>), because there are no more, might doubtless see with four if there were so many properly placed and disposed; or, if its habitation were <em>all eye</em> (window all round), might see all round. And so, in general, that which now can know many things by the impressions made at the ends of the nerves, or by the intervention of our present organs, and in this situation and inclosure can know them no other way, may for all that, when it comes to be loosed out of that prison,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-590" id="noteref-590" epub:type="noteref">590</a> know them <em>immediately</em>, or by some other medium. That which is now forced to make shift with words and signs of things in its reasonings, may, when it shall be set at liberty and can come at them, reason upon the intuition of things themselves, or use a language more spiritual or ideal. I say, it is not <em>impossible</em> that this should be the case; and therefore no one can say, with reason, that it is not: especially, since we find by experience that the soul is limited, that the limitations are variable, that we know not enough of the nature of spirit to determine how these limitations are effected, and therefore cannot tell how far they may be carried on or taken off. This suffices to remove the force of the objection. But further,</p>
					<p>A man when he wakes, or “comes to himself” (which phrase implies what I am going to say), immediately knows this, and knows himself to be the same soul that he was before his sleep or fainting away. I will suppose that he is also conscious to himself that in those intervals he thought not at all (which is the same the objector must suppose)⁠—that is, if his body had been cut to pieces or mouldered to dust, he could not have thought less⁠—for there is no thinking less than thinking not at all. From hence, then, I gather that the soul preserves a capacity of thinking, <abbr>etc.</abbr> under those circumstances and indispositions of the body in which it thinks no more than if the body was destroyed, and that therefore it may, and will, preserve it when the body is destroyed. And if so, what can this capacity be preserved for? Certainly not that it may never be exerted. The Author of nature does not use to act after that manner. So that here is this dilemma to be opposed to the objection: In sleep and swoonings the soul does either think, or not. If it does, the objection has no foundation; and if it does not, then all that will follow which I have just now said.</p>
					<p>If we should suppose the soul to be a being by nature made to inform some body, and that it cannot exist and act in a state of total separation from all body, it would not follow from hence that what we call death must therefore reduce it to a state of absolute insensitivity and inactivity, which to it would be equal to nonexistence. For that body, which is so necessary to it, may be some fine vehicle that dwells with it in the brain (according to that hypothesis <a href="#p-50">some paragraphs back</a>) and goes off with it at death. Neither the answers to the objection, nor the case after death, will be much altered by such a supposition. And since I confess I see no absurdity in it, I will try to explain it a little further: We are sensible of many material impressions (impressions made upon us by material causes, or bodies); that there are such, we are sure. Therefore there must be some matter within us, which, being moved or pressed upon, the soul apprehends it immediately. And therefore, again, there must be some matter to which it is immediately and intimately united, and related in such a manner as it is not related to any other. Let us now suppose this said matter to be some refined and spirituous vehicle,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-591" id="noteref-591" epub:type="noteref">591</a> which the soul does immediately inform, with which it sympathizes, by which it acts and is acted upon, and to which it is vitally and inseparably united; and that this animated vehicle has its abode in the brain, among the heads and beginnings of the nerves. Suppose we also, that when any impressions are made upon the organs or parts of the body, the effects of them are carried by the nerves up to their fountain, and the place where the soul in its vehicle is, and there they communicate their several motions or tremors to this material vehicle (or by their motions, or tendency to motion, press upon it), so that the soul, which inhabits it in a peculiar manner and is thoroughly possessed of it, shall be apprehensive of these motions or pressures; and moreover, that this vehicle, so guarded and encompassed by the body as it is, can be come at or moved by external objects no other way but by the mediation of the nerves; nor the soul, by consequence, have any direct intelligence concerning them, or correspondence with them, any other way. And as we suppose the soul to receive notices of things from without in this manner, so let us suppose, on the other side, that by moving its own vehicle it may produce motion in the contiguous spirits and nerves, and so move the body: I mean, when nothing renders them unfit to be moved. Let us suppose further that the soul, by means of this vehicle, feels or finds those prints and portraits, or those effects and remains left by objects on the mind in some manner or other, which cause the remembrance of words and things: I mean again, when they are not filled up or obscured by anything; or, when there are any such to be felt. And lastly, let us suppose that if the soul in its more abstracted and purer reasonings, or more spiritual acts, has any occasion for matter to serve it, the matter of this vehicle is that which is always with it, and serves it. All which it is easy to understand, and perhaps not very difficult to suppose. On the contrary, by many symptoms it appears most probable that that matter to which the mind is immediately present, and in which is its true <i xml:lang="he-Latn">shekinah</i>, is not the whole gross body, but some <em>subtle body</em>, placed (as I have said) in the region of the brain. For there all the conveyances of sensible species conspire to meet, and there in reflection we find ourselves: when a limb is lost, the soul, ’tis true, loses an opportunity of receiving intelligence from or by it, and of using it, but perceives no loss <em>in itself</em>: and though the body, many parts of it at least, are in a perpetual flux and continually altering, yet I know that the substance which thinks within me now (or rather, which is I) is, notwithstanding all the changes my body has undergone, the very same which thought above fifty years ago, and ever since: when I played in such a field, went to such a school, was of such a university, performed such and such exercises, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-592" id="noteref-592" epub:type="noteref">592</a> If you would permit me to use a school term, I would say the “egoity”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-593" id="noteref-593" epub:type="noteref">593</a> remains. Now to answer the objection, and apply all this to our purpose: Why do we not perceive external objects in our sleep or a swoon? Because the passages are become impracticable, the windows shut, and the nerves, being obstructed or somehow rendered for the time useless, can transmit no information to it. Why, however, does it not reason and think about something or other? Because, all the marks by which things are remembered, being for the present choked up or disordered, the remembrance of those objects about which it is wont to employ itself, and even of the words (or other signs) in which it uses to reason and to preserve the deductions and conclusions it makes, is all suspended and lost for the time; and so, its tables being covered, its books closed, and its tools locked up, the requisites for reasoning are wanting, and no subject offers itself to exercise its thoughts, it having yet had little or no opportunity to take in higher objects and more refined matter for contemplation. And to conclude, if it be demanded, why anyone should imagine that the soul may think, perceive, act after death, when it does not do this in sleep, <abbr>etc.</abbr> the answer is: because those enclosures and impediments which occasioned the forementioned intermissions, and those great limitations under which it labors at all times, will be removed with its enlargement out of the body. When it shall in its proper vehicle be let go, and take its flight into the open fields of heaven, it will then be bare to the immediate impressions of objects: and why should not those impressions which affected the nerves that moved and affected the vehicle and soul in it, affect the vehicle immediately when they are immediately made upon it, without the interposition of the nerves? The hand, which feels an object at the end of a staff, may certainly be allowed to feel the same much better by immediate contact, without the staff. Nay, why should we not think that it may admit of <em>more</em> objects and the knowledge of more things than it can now, since, being exposed all round to the influences of them, it may be moved not only by visible objects just at the extremities of the optic nerves, by sounds at the ends of the auditory, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, but become, as it were, all eye to visible objects, all ear to audible, and so on? And why should we not think this the rather, because then the soul may be also perceptive of finer impressions and ethereal contacts, and consequently of more kinds of objects, such as we are now incapable of knowing? And then, this being so, why should we not presage that other endowments, as faculties of reasoning, communicating thoughts, and the like, will be proportionable to such noble opportunities of knowledge? There seems to be nothing in this account <em>impossible</em>, and therefore nothing but what <em>may be</em>.</p>
					<p>If we do but attend, we must see everywhere that many things are by ways which we do not, nor can, understand; and therefore we must be convinced, even from hence, that more may be, and therefore that the objection before us (though we could salve the difficulties in it, and what is supposed here should be all rejected as chimerical) yet ought to be no prejudice against the belief of the immortality of the soul, if there is any (but <em>one</em>) good reason for it.</p>
					<p>But if we can, in any tolerable manner (which in our present circumstances is as much as can be expected), account for the difficulties objected, and those the greatest belonging to this matter, and show how it is possible that they may consist with immortality, this will greatly corroborate the arguments for it, if not be one itself. This I hope is done; or, if I have not spoke directly to every part of the objection, from what has been done that defect may easily be supplied.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>We may conclude the souls of men to be immortal from the nature of God. For if he is (which sure nobody doubts) a Perfect being, He, as such, can do nothing inconsistent with perfect or right reason. And then no being, nor circumstance of any being, can come, from Him as its cause, which it is not agreeable to such reason should be; or (which is the same): He cannot but deal <em>reasonably</em> with all His dependents. And then again, if we are in the number of these, and the mortality of the human soul does not consist with reason, we may be sure it is immortal: as sure as we can be of anything by the use of our faculties, and that is as sure as we can be of anything. Whether therefore that does consist with reason or not, is to be inquired.</p>
					<p>To produce a being into a state of clear happiness, in any degree, can be no injury to it⁠—or into a state of mixed happiness, provided the happiness certainly overbalances the contrary, and the unhappy or suffering part be not greater than what that being would choose in order to obtain the happiness, or rather than lose it. Nor, again, can any wrong be done by producing a being subject to more misery than happiness, if that being has it in his own power to avoid the misery, or so much of it as may leave the remainder of misery not greater than what he would rather sustain than miss the proportion of happiness. The only case then, by which wrong can be done in the production of any being, is when it is necessarily and irremediably to be miserable, without any recompense or balance of that misery:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-594" id="noteref-594" epub:type="noteref">594</a> and this indeed is a case so grievous, so utterly irreconcilable to all reason, that the heart of a reasoning and considering man can scarce bear the thought of it. So much everyone must understand of the nature of reason and justice, as to allow these things for truths incontestable.</p>
					<p>Now then, he who says the soul of man is mortal must say one of these two things: either that God is an unreasonable, unjust, cruel Being; or that no man in respect of this life (which according to him is <em>all</em>), has a greater share of misery, unavoidable, than of happiness. To say the former is to contradict that which I presume has been proved beyond contradiction. To which I may add here that this is to avow such an unworthy, impious notion of the Supreme being, as one would not entertain without caution even of the worst of men; such a one, as even the person himself, who says this, must know to be false. For he cannot but see, and must own, many instances of the reasonableness and beneficence of the Deity, not one of which could be, if cruelty and unreasonableness were His inclination: since He has power to execute His own inclinations thoroughly, and is a Being uniform in his nature. Then to say the latter, is to contradict the whole story of mankind, and even one’s own senses. Consider well the dreadful effects of many wars, and all those barbarous desolations, which we read of: what cruel tyrants there are, and have been, in the world, who (at least in their fits) divert themselves with the pangs and convulsions of their fellow-creatures;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-595" id="noteref-595" epub:type="noteref">595</a> what slavery is,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-596" id="noteref-596" epub:type="noteref">596</a> and how men have been brought into that lamentable state; how many have been ruined by accidents unforeseen; how many have suffered or been undone by unjust laws, judges, witnesses, <abbr>etc.</abbr>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-597" id="noteref-597" epub:type="noteref">597</a> how many have brought incurable diseases, or the causes of them and of great torments, into the world with them; how many more, such bodily infirmities and disadvantages, as have rendered their whole lives uneasy; how many are born to no other inheritance but invincible poverty and trouble? Instances are endless: but, for a little taste of the condition of mankind here, reflect upon that story related by Strabo (from Polybius) and Plutarch, where, even by order of the Roman senate, Paullus Æmylius, one of the best of them too, at one prefixed hour sacked and destroyed seventy cities, unawares, and drove fifteen myriads of innocent persons into captivity, to be sold only to raise pay for the merciless soldiers and their own executioners. Peruse that account of the gold-works in the confines of Egypt given by Diodorus, and think over the circumstances of the unfortunate laborers there, who were not only criminals or men taken in war, but even such as calumny or unjust power had doomed (perhaps for being too good) to that place of torment, many times with all their relations and poor children.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-598" id="noteref-598" epub:type="noteref">598</a> Or, once for all, take a view of servitude as it is described by Pignorius. To pass over the Sicilian tyrants, him of Pheræ, Apollodorus,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-599" id="noteref-599" epub:type="noteref">599</a> and the like, of which history supplies plenty; consider those terrible proscriptions among the Romans,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-600" id="noteref-600" epub:type="noteref">600</a> with the reigns of most of their emperors, more bloody than Lybic lion or Hyrcanian tiger⁠—even some of the Christian emperors not excepted. Read the direful and unjust executions reported by Ammianus Marcellinus; among hundreds of others that of Eusebius.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-601" id="noteref-601" epub:type="noteref">601</a> Every whisper in those times, or light suspicion, brought upon men the question and tortures inconceivable. Men’s very dreams were once interpreted to be treason, and they durst scarce own that they had ever slept.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-602" id="noteref-602" epub:type="noteref">602</a> What inhuman punishments were used among the Persians,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-603" id="noteref-603" epub:type="noteref">603</a> in an arbitrary manner too, and many times extended to whole families and all the kindred, though not concerned?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-604" id="noteref-604" epub:type="noteref">604</a> But instead of enumerating here burnings, crucifixions, breakings upon the wheel, impalings, <i xml:lang="grc">σκαφισμοὺς</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-605" id="noteref-605" epub:type="noteref">605</a> <abbr>etc.</abbr> I choose to refer you to those authors who have designedly treated of the torments and questions of the ancients. Look into the history of the Christian Church, and her martyrologies; examine the prisons of the inquisition, the groans of which those walls are conscious, and upon what slight occasions men are racked and tortured by the tormentors there; and, to finish this detail (hideous indeed, but too true) as fast as I can, consider the many massacres, persecutions, and miseries consequent upon them, which false religion has caused, authorized, sanctified. Indeed the history of mankind is little else but the history of uncomfortable, dreadful passages: and a great part of it, however things are palliated and gilded over, is scarcely to be read by a good-natured man without amazement, horror, tears. One can scarce look into a newspaper, or out at his window, but hardships and sufferings present themselves in one shape or other. Now, among all those millions who have suffered eminently, can it be imagined that there have not been multitudes whose griefs and pangs have far outweighed all their enjoyments, and yet who have not been able, either by their innocence, their prudence, or any power in them, to escape that bitter draught which they have drunk? And then, how can we acquit the justice and reasonableness of that Being upon whom these poor creatures depend, and who leaves them such great losers by their existence, if there be no future state where the proper amends may be made? So that the argument is brought to this undeniable issue: if the soul of man is not immortal, either there is no God upon whom we depend, or He is an unreasonable Being, or there never has been any man whose sufferings in this world have exceeded his enjoyments without his being the cause of it himself. But surely no one of these three things can be said. Ergo⁠ ⁠…</p>
					<p>That which aggravates the hard case of the poor sufferers mentioned above⁠—if there be no future state in which their past sufferings may be brought into the account and recompensated⁠—is that many times their persecutors and tormentors pass their lives in plenty and grandeur: that is, the innocent have not only the portion that properly belongs to the criminal and unreasonable part of mankind, but the guilty have that which belongs rather to the innocent.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-606" id="noteref-606" epub:type="noteref">606</a> Such a transposition of rewards and punishments, ending in itself, without any respect to something which is to follow hereafter, can never consist with the nature of a Governor who is not very much below rational: a thought which God forbid anyone should dare to admit of Him. To suppose the virtuous and wise left ultimately but in the same state with the unjust and profligate is to suppose such a constitution of nature as never can flow from a principle of reason, a God of truth and equity; and therefore, such a constitution as leaves the former in a worse condition than the other, can much less be supposed.</p>
					<p>Objection: It has been said that virtue tends to make men’s lives happy even here, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and how then can the virtuous be supposed ever to be so very miserable? Answer: In ordinary cases virtue does produce happiness; at least it has indeed a natural tendency to it, is the mean by which it is most likely to be attained, and is therefore the way which a wise man would choose for his own sake. But then it does not follow from hence that there are no perturbations in human affairs: no cases in which the usual effect of virtue may be overpowered by diseases, violence, disasters. It does not render men invulnerable, cannot command the seasons, nor prevent many great calamities under which virtue and vice must fall undistinguished. (There may be a direct road to a place, and such a one, as he who sets out for that place ought to be found in, and yet it is possible he may meet with robbers or accidents in it, that may incommode, or hurt him in his journey.) On the other side, vice and wickedness may be so circumstantiated as to be attended with much greater pleasure than pain, contrary to the tendency of its nature; that is, a wicked man may be of a healthful make, born to riches or power, or fortunately placed for attaining them, and from the advantage of a strong body, an ample fortune, many friends, or lucky hits, he may derive pleasures which shall exceed the present inconveniences and sufferings naturally following from his vices.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-607" id="noteref-607" epub:type="noteref">607</a></p>
					<p>Men’s circumstances have a natural influence with respect to the present pleasures or sufferings, as well as their virtue or vice. Nobody, sure, ever said that all depends only upon these; nor, when the natural tendence of them is asserted, is the natural tendence or effect of the other denied. Therefore indeed, when it is said that virtue naturally tends to make men happy even here, the meaning only is that it tends to make men happy in proportion to their circumstances; and vice does the contrary. It is naturally productive of that part of happiness which is in our own power and depends upon ourselves; makes men more truly happy, whatever their circumstances are, than they could be without it; and commonly tends to mend their worldly circumstances too⁠—but it is not asserted that virtue can always entirely correct them, or make men so completely happy in this life, as that their enjoyments shall exceed their mortifications: no more than the vices of some particular men, though they bereave them of many solid pleasures, and bring troubles upon them too, do hinder their worldly enjoyments from being greater than their present sufferings. Not only our being, but our place, with the time and manner of our being in this world, depend upon the Author of the scheme; the manner of behaving ourselves in our station (according to our endowments, and the talents we have) only depends upon us. And perhaps (which has been hinted already) He has so ordered things on purpose, that from the various compositions of men’s circumstances with the natural effects of their virtues and vices, and the many inequalities arising thence, they might see the necessity and certainty of another state: and that for this reason there should always be some remarkable instances of oppressed innocence and flourishing wickedness.</p>
					<p>The upshot is that upon comparing those pleasures which are the natural effects of virtue, with those sufferings which are the natural effects of ill constitution or other calamity, these are many, very many times found to exceed; and, <i xml:lang="la">è contrario</i>, upon balancing those evils which are the genuine effects of vice, against the advantages resulting from a fortunate estate, these may often be found to outdo the other. Both contrary to reason, if all ends with this life, and after death be nothing. For my part, if there were only some few, nay but <em>one</em> instance of each kind in the world (unfortunate virtue, and prosperous wickedness), it would be to me a sufficient argument for a future state, because God cannot be unjust or unreasonable in any one instance. It must not be forgot here, that many times men of great vices have also great virtues, and the natural effect of these may qualify that of the other, and being added to their favorable circumstances may help to turn the scale.</p>
					<p>If there is no other besides the present being, the general and usual state of mankind is scarce consistent with the idea of a reasonable cause. Let us consider it a little.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-608" id="noteref-608" epub:type="noteref">608</a> Not to mention what we must suffer from the very settlement and condition of this world by hunger, thirst, heat, cold, and indispositions; like leaves one generation drops, and another springs up, to fall again, and be forgotten.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-609" id="noteref-609" epub:type="noteref">609</a> As we come into the world with the labor of our mothers, we soon go out of it with our own. Childhood and youth are much of them lost in insensibility or trifling, vanity and rudeness; obnoxious to many pains and accidents; and, when they are spent in the best manner, are attended with labor and discipline. When we reach that stage of life which usually takes us from our nearest relations and brings us out into the world, with what difficulty are proper employments and stations found for us? When we are got out and left to scramble for ourselves, how many hardships and tricks are put upon us before we get the sagacity and dexterity to save ourselves? How many chances do we stand? How troublesome is business made by unreasonableness, ill nature, or trifling and want of punctuality in the persons with whom we deal? How do we find ourselves instantly surrounded with snares from designing men, knaves, enemies (of which the best men have some), opposite interests, factions, and many times from a mischievous breed whose childish or diabolical humor seeks pleasure in the uneasiness of other people? Even in many of those enjoyments which men principally propose to themselves, they are greatly disappointed, and experience shows how unlike they are to the antecedent images of them. They are commonly mixed:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-610" id="noteref-610" epub:type="noteref">610</a> the apparatus to most of them is too operose; the completion of them seldom depends upon ourselves alone, but upon a concurrence of things, which rarely hit all right;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-611" id="noteref-611" epub:type="noteref">611</a> they are generally not only less in practice than in theory, but die almost as soon as they are; and perhaps they entail upon us a tax to be paid after they are gone. To go on with the history of human life: though affairs go prosperously, yet still perhaps a family is increasing, and with it new occasions of solicitude are introduced, accompanied with many fears and tender apprehensions. At length, if a man, through many cares and toils and various adventures, arrives at old age, then he feels most commonly his pressures rather increased than diminished, and himself less able to support them.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-612" id="noteref-612" epub:type="noteref">612</a> The business he has to do grows urgent upon him and calls for dispatch; most of his faculties and active powers begin now to fail him apace; relations and friends, who might be helpful to him (and among them perhaps the dear Consort of all his joys, and all his cares<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-613" id="noteref-613" epub:type="noteref">613</a>) leave him, never to return more; wants and pains all the while are multiplying upon him; and under this additional load he comes melancholy behind, tottering, and bending toward the earth, till he either stumbles upon something which throws him into the grave,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-614" id="noteref-614" epub:type="noteref">614</a> or, fainting, falls of himself. And must he end here? Is this the period of his being? Is this all? Did he come into the world only to make his way through the press, amidst many justlings and hard struggles, with at best only a few deceitful, little, fugacious pleasures interspersed, and so go out of it again? Can this be an end worthy a first Cause perfectly reasonable? Would even any <em>man</em>, of common sense and good nature, send another upon a difficult journey in which⁠—though he might perhaps now and then meet with a little smooth way, get an interval for rest and contemplation, or be flattered with some verdures and the smiles of a few daisies on the banks of the road⁠—yet upon the whole he must travel through much dirt, take many wearisome steps, be continually inquiring after some clue or directions to carry him through the turnings and intricacies of it, be puzzled how to get a competent <i xml:lang="la">viaticum</i> and pay his reckonings, ever and anon be in danger of being lost in deep waters, and besides, forced all the while to fence against weather, accidents, and cruel robbers, who are everywhere lying in wait for him: I say, would anyone send a man upon such a journey as this, only that the man might faint and expire at the end of it, and all his thoughts perish: that is, either for no end at all, or for the punishment of one whom I suppose never to have hurt him, nor ever to have been capable of hurting him? And now, can we impute to God that which is below the common size of men?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-615" id="noteref-615" epub:type="noteref">615</a></p>
					<p>I am apt to think that even among those whose state is beheld with envy, there are many who, if at the end of their course they were put to their option whether, without any respect to a future state, they would repeat all the pleasures they have had in life, upon condition to go over again also all the same disappointments, the same vexations and unkind treatments from the world, the same secret pangs and tedious hours, the same labors of body and mind, the same pains and sicknesses, would be far from accepting them at that price.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-616" id="noteref-616" epub:type="noteref">616</a></p>
					<p>But here the case, as I have put it, only respects them who may be reckoned among the <em>more fortunate</em> passengers, and for one that makes his voyage so well, thousands are tossed in tempests and lost.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-617" id="noteref-617" epub:type="noteref">617</a> How many never attain any comfortable settlement in the world? How many fail, after they have attained it, by various misfortunes? What melancholy, what distractions are caused in families by inhumane or vicious husbands, false or peevish wives, refractory or unhappy children; and, if they are otherwise, if they are good, what sorrow by the loss of them? How many are forced by necessity upon drudging and very shocking employments for a poor livelihood? How many subsist upon begging, borrowing, and other shifts, nor can do otherwise? How many meet with sad accidents, or fall into deplorable diseases? Are not all companies, and the very streets, filled with complaints, and grievances, and doleful stories? I verily believe that a great part of mankind may ascribe their deaths to want and dejection. Seriously, the present state of mankind is unaccountable if it has not some connection with another, and be not, as it were, the porch or entry to it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-618" id="noteref-618" epub:type="noteref">618</a></p>
					<p>There is one thing more, of which notice ought to be taken. To one who carefully peruses the story and face of the world, what appears to prevail in it? Is it not corruption, vice, iniquity, folly, at least? Are not debauching,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-619" id="noteref-619" epub:type="noteref">619</a> getting <i xml:lang="la">per fas aut nefas</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-620" id="noteref-620" epub:type="noteref">620</a> defaming one another, erecting tyrannies of one kind or other, propagating empty and senseless opinions with bawling and fury, the great business of this world? And are not all these contrary to reason? Can anyone then, with reason, imagine that reason should be given, though it were but to a few, only to be run down and trampled upon and then extinguished? May we not rather conclude that there must be some world where reason will have its turn, and prevail and triumph? Some kingdom of reason to come?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-621" id="noteref-621" epub:type="noteref">621</a></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>In the last place, that great expectation which men have of continuing to live in another state beyond the grave, has, I suppose, been commonly admitted as one proof that they <em>shall</em> live, and does seem indeed to me to add some weight to what has been said. That they generally have had such an expectation, can scarce be denied. The histories of mankind, their deifications, rites, stories of apparitions, the frequent mention of a hades, with rewards and punishments hereafter, <abbr>etc.</abbr> all testify that even the Heathen world believed that the souls of men survived their bodies. Their ignorance, indeed, of the seats and circumstances of the departed has begot many errors and superstitions, and these have been multiplied by licentious poets and idle visionaries, but this, being no more than what is usual in the like cases, ought to be no prejudice against the fundamental opinion itself.</p>
					<p>Cicero,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-622" id="noteref-622" epub:type="noteref">622</a> though he owns there were different opinions among the Greek philosophers about this matter, that <i xml:lang="la">quod literis extet, Pherecydes Syrus primum dixit, animos hominum esse sempiternos</i>, that Pythagoras and his school confirmed this opinion; that Plato was the man who brought a reason for it, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, yet tells us plainly, <i xml:lang="la">naturam ipsam de immortalitate animorum tacitam judicare</i>, that <i xml:lang="la">nescio quomodo inhæret in mentibus quasi sæculorum quoddam augurium</i>, that <i xml:lang="la">permanere animos arbitramur consensu nationum omnium</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-623" id="noteref-623" epub:type="noteref">623</a> and more to this purpose. Now if this consent was only the effect of some tradition handed from parents to their children, yet since we meet with it in all the quarters of the world (where there is any civility or sense), and in all ages, it seems to be coeval to mankind itself, and born with it. And this is sufficient to give a great authority to this opinion of the soul’s immortality. But this is not all. For it is supported by all the foregoing arguments, and many other reasonings and symptoms which we may find within ourselves. All which, put together, may at least justify an expectation of a future state⁠—that is, render it a just or reasonable expectation⁠—and then this reasonable expectation grows, by being such, into a further argument, that there <em>will be</em> such a state.</p>
					<p>Fancy a man walking in some retired field, far from noise, and free from prejudice, to debate this matter with himself; and then judge whether such meditations as these would not be just: “I think I may be sure that neither lifeless matter, nor the vegetative tribe⁠—that stone, that flower, that tree⁠—have any reflex thoughts; nor do the sensitive animals⁠—that sheep, that ox⁠—seem to have any such thing, or but in the lowest degree, and in respect of present objects only. They do not reason, nor discourse. I may, therefore, certainly pretend to be something much above all these things.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-624" id="noteref-624" epub:type="noteref">624</a> I not only apprehend and consider these external objects acting at present upon my nerves, but have <em>ideas</em> raised within myself of a higher order, and many: I can not only represent to myself things that are, or have been, but deduce many other from them, make excursions into futurity, and foresee much of what will be, or at least may be⁠—by strict thinking I had almost said, ‘get into another world beforehand’⁠—and, whether I shall live in some other state after death or not, I am certainly a being capable of such an expectation, and cannot but be solicitous about it; none of which things can be said of these clods, or those brutes.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-625" id="noteref-625" epub:type="noteref">625</a> Can I then be designed for nothing further than just to eat, drink, sleep, walk about, and act upon this earth:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-626" id="noteref-626" epub:type="noteref">626</a> that is, to have no further being than what these brutes have, so far beneath me? Can I be made capable of such great expectations, which those animals know nothing of (happier by far in this regard than I am, if we must die alike), only to be disappointed at last? Thus placed, just upon the confines of another better world, and fed with hopes of penetrating into it and enjoying it, only to make a short appearance here<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-627" id="noteref-627" epub:type="noteref">627</a> and then to be shut out and totally sunk? Must I then, when I bid my last farewell to these walks, when I close these lids, and yonder blue regions and all this scene darken upon me and go out⁠—must I then only serve to furnish dust to be mingled with the ashes of these herds and plants, or with this dirt under my feet? Have I been set so far above them in life, only to be leveled with them at death?”</p>
					<p>This argument grows stronger in the apprehension of one who is conscious of abilities and intellectual improvements which he has had no opportunity, here, of showing and using: through want of health, want of confidence,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-628" id="noteref-628" epub:type="noteref">628</a> want of proper place, want of liberty. Such improvements, and the knowledge consequent upon them, cannot ultimately respect this state; they can be only an enlargement, and preparation for another. That is all they can be, and if they are not that, they are nothing. And therefore, he may be supposed thus, further, to argue within himself: “Can the Author of my reasoning faculties be himself so <em>unreasonable</em> as to give me them, either not to employ them, or only to weary myself with useless pursuits, and then drop me? Can He, who is privy to all my circumstances, and to these very thoughts of mine, be so insensible of my case as to have no regard to it, and not provide for it?”</p>
					<p>It grows stronger still upon the mind of one who, reflecting upon the hard treatment he has met with from this world, the little cause he has given for it, the pains and secret uneasiness he has felt upon that score, together with many other sufferings which it was not in his power to prevent, cannot but make a silent, humble appeal to that Being who is his last and true refuge, and who he must believe will not defeat him thus.</p>
					<p>Lastly, it is strongest of all to one who, besides all this, endeavors in the conduct of his life to observe the laws of reason (that is, of his nature; and that is, of the Author of nature upon whom he depends); laments and labors against his own infirmities; implores the Divine mercy; prays for some better state hereafter; acts and lives in the hopes of one; and denies himself many things upon that view: one who, by the exaltation of his reason and upper faculties⁠—and that which is certainly the effect of real and useful philosophy: the practice of virtue⁠—is still approaching toward a higher manner of being, and does already taste something spiritual and above this world. To such a one there must be a strong expectation, indeed, and the argument built upon it must be proportionable. For can he be endowed with such capacities, and have, as it were, <em>overtures</em> of immortality made him, if after all there is no such thing? Must his private acts and concealed exercises of religion be all lost?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-629" id="noteref-629" epub:type="noteref">629</a> Can a perfect Being have so little regard to one who, however inferior and nothing to Him, yet regards Him according to his best abilities in the government of himself?</p>
					<p>Are such meditations and reflections as these well founded, or not? If they are, it must be reasonable to think that God will satisfy a reasonable expectation.</p>
				</li>
			</ol>
			<p>There are other arguments for the immortality of the soul, two of which I will leave with you, to be at your leisure pondered well. The one is that, if the souls of men are mortal (extinguished at death), the case of brutes is by much preferable to that of men. The pleasures of brutes, though but sensual, are more sincere, being palled or diminished by no diverting consideration. They go wholly into them, and when they have them not, they seem less to want them, not thinking of them. Their sufferings are attended with no reflection,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-630" id="noteref-630" epub:type="noteref">630</a> but are such as they are said to be <a href="section-2.xhtml#s-2-p-11">section <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, observation 8</a>. They are void of cares; are under no apprehension for families and posterity; never fatigue themselves with vain inquiries, hunting after knowledge which must perish with them; are not anxious about their future state,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-631" id="noteref-631" epub:type="noteref">631</a> nor can be disappointed of any hopes or expectations; and at last some sudden blow (or a few minutes of unforeseen pain) finishes them, having never so much as known that they were mortal.</p>
			<p>The other is that the soul is a principle of life: that which brings vitality to the body. For how should that which has been proved to be a substance, and at the same time is also a principle of life, and as such (as being what it is) is alive⁠—I say, how can that die,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-632" id="noteref-632" epub:type="noteref">632</a> unless it is annihilated?</p>
			<p>Here I begin to be very sensible how much I want a guide. But as the religion of nature is my theme, I must at present content myself with that light which nature affords; my business being, as it seems, only to show what a Heathen philosopher, without any other help, and almost <i xml:lang="grc">αὐτοδίδακτος</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-633" id="noteref-633" epub:type="noteref">633</a> may be supposed to think. I hope that neither the doing of this, nor anything else contained in this Delineation, can be the least prejudice to any other true religion. Whatever is immediately revealed from God must, as well as anything else, be treated as being <em>what it is</em>, which cannot be if it is not treated with the highest regard, believed, and obeyed. That, therefore, which has been so much insisted on by me, and is, as it were, the burden of my song, is so far from undermining true <em>revealed</em> religion, that it rather paves the way for its reception. This I take this opportunity to remark to you once for all. And so, returning to my philosopher, I cannot imagine but that even he would have at least some such general thoughts as these which make up almost the remainder of this last section.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. <i>The soul, when it parts from this gross body, will pass by some law into some new seat, or state, agreeable to the nature of it.</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-634" id="noteref-634" epub:type="noteref">634</a> Every species of beings must belong to some region, or state. Because nothing can be, but it must be <em>somewhere</em> and <em>somehow</em>; and there being different kinds of abodes and manners of subsisting in the universe, and the natures of the things that are to exist in them being also different, there will be a greater congruity between these several natures respectively and some particular places or states, than there is between them and others; and indeed, such a one that out of those, perhaps, they cannot subsist, or not naturally. To those, therefore, must be their respective tendences; to those they are adjudged by the course of nature and constitution of things, or rather by the Author of them.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-635" id="noteref-635" epub:type="noteref">635</a></p>
			<p>While the soul is in the body, it has some powers and opportunities of moving it spontaneously, or otherwise than it would be moved by the mere laws of gravitation and mechanism. This is evident. But yet, notwithstanding this, the weight of that body to which at present it is limited (among other causes) constrains it to act for a while upon this stage. That general law to which bodies are subjected, makes it sink in this fluid of air, so much lighter than itself; keeps it down; and so determines the seat of it, and of the soul in it, to be upon the surface of this earth where, or in whose neighborhood, it was first produced. But then, when the soul shall be disengaged from the gross matter which now encloses and encumbers it, and either become naked spirit or be only veiled in its own fine and obsequious vehicle, it must at the same time be either freed from the laws of bodies and fall under some other, which will carry it to some proper mansion or state,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-636" id="noteref-636" epub:type="noteref">636</a> or at least by the old ones be capable of mounting upwards<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-637" id="noteref-637" epub:type="noteref">637</a> in proportion to the volatility of its vehicle, and of emerging out of these regions into some medium more suitable and (if the philosopher may say so) equilibrious. Thus much as to the general state of souls after death. But then,</p>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>. <i>In this new state, or place of abode, there may be different stations befitting the differences of particular souls among themselves, as they are more or less perfect in their kind.</i> We see even inanimate bodies, which have different gravities, figures, impulses, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, settle into some order among themselves, agreeable to these differences. And so by the same universal rule in nature (<abbr>viz.</abbr> that differences in things are attended with answerable relations and effects) souls must also take their situation in some kind of order according to their differences</p>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>. <i>The great difference of human souls, with respect to perfection and imperfection, lies in their different degrees and habits<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-638" id="noteref-638" epub:type="noteref">638</a> of reasonableness or unreasonableness.</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-639" id="noteref-639" epub:type="noteref">639</a> That is to say: not only in men’s different improvements, or neglects and abuse, of their rational faculties; but also in the greater or less influence of these upon their actions, and by consequence in their different degrees of virtue or vice. For a man is accounted a <em>reasonable</em> man when he reasons rightly and follows his reason: in which expression virtue must be included, being (as <a href="#p-5">proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, et <abbr>al.</abbr></a>) nothing but the practice of reason and truth.</p>
			<p>That men are reasonable, or the contrary, in <em>different degrees</em> is plain. Some reason well upon some subjects but, in respect of others to which they have not been accustomed, are dim and confused; or they are partial to their vices and passions, their old impressions and parties, and so their reason is not general, nor has its due extent or influence. Others, whose reason is uncultivated and weak, though they have virtuous inclinations, many times fall into superstition and absurdities: misled by authorities and overawed by old, or formal, modes of speaking, and grave nonsense. Many, if not the most, seem to have scarce any notion of reason or virtue at all, but act fortuitously, or as they see other folks act: moved either by bodily propensions or by example. Some few there are who endeavor to improve their understandings, to discover what is agreeable to reason, and to fix their opinions⁠—and conduct their lives accordingly. And in all these several kinds there are various degrees of elevation in knowledge and virtue and of immersion in vice and ignorance, and new differences arising endlessly. All this is visible.</p>
			<p>Now the soul, reflecting, finds in itself two general faculties: one by which it understands, and judges, and reasons (all which I comprehend under the term “rational faculties,” or “reason”); and another, by which it wills, or determines to act, according to the judgments and conclusions made in the upper part of it. And the more perfectly it performs these operations (<abbr class="initialism">i.e.</abbr> the more truly it reasons, and the more readily it wills and executes the decisions of reason), the more perfect, certainly, it must be in its kind; and the more imperfectly, the more imperfect. The accomplishments, therefore, and perfections of human souls, and the contrary, must be in proportion to the forementioned differences.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>. <i>According to these differences, then, it is reasonable to think the souls of men will find their stations in the future world.</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-640" id="noteref-640" epub:type="noteref">640</a> This is but a corollary from what goes before.</p>
			<p>Objection: Why should we think that God causes things to be in such a manner as that in the future state, men shall be placed and treated according to their merit and the progress they have made in reason and virtue, when we see the case to be widely different in <em>this</em>? Answer: It must be remembered that this is one of those very <em>reasons</em> on which the belief of the soul’s immortality is founded. Now, if it be reasonable to believe there is a future state, because things are dealt unequally now, upon that very score it will be reasonable to think that they are dealt equally<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-641" id="noteref-641" epub:type="noteref">641</a> in that other state.</p>
			<p>Here, bodily wants and affections, and such things as proceed from them, do intermix with human affairs, and do confound merit with demerit, knowledge with ignorance: and hence it comes to pass, many times, that bad men enjoy much and good men suffer, and both are, if there is no other state, in their wrong places. But, when the corporeal causes of misplacing shall be removed, spirits (or spirits and their <i xml:lang="grc">σώματα πνευματικὰ</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-642" id="noteref-642" epub:type="noteref">642</a>) may be supposed more regularly to take their due posts and privileges: the impudent and vicious will have no such opportunities of getting into circumstances of which they are unworthy, nor improved and virtuous minds find such obstructions to keep them down in circumstances unworthy of them. Be sure: the more advanced and pure any state is, the more properly will the inhabitants be ranked, and the juster and more natural will the subordination of its members be.</p>
			<p>Even <em>here</em> we commonly find men in that kind of business for which they are educated and prepared, men of the same professions generally keeping together, the virtuous and reasonable desiring to be (though they not always can be) with their like,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-643" id="noteref-643" epub:type="noteref">643</a> and the vicious (as they scarcely cannot be) with theirs. And why should we not think that an association and communion of souls with those of their own size, disposition, and habits may be more <em>universal</em> and <em>complete</em>, when those things which in great measure hinder it, here, shall be no more? If we may think this, certainly those fields or states in which the virtuous and wise<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-644" id="noteref-644" epub:type="noteref">644</a> shall meet must be different from those in which the foolish and wicked shall herd together.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-645" id="noteref-645" epub:type="noteref">645</a> The very difference of the company will itself create a vast difference in the manner of their living.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span>. <i>The mansions and conditions of the virtuous and reasoning part must be proportionably better than those of the foolish and vicious.</i> The proposition cannot be inverted, or the case be otherwise, if the constitution of things depends upon a reasonable cause⁠—as I have endeavored to show it does.</p>
			<p>Corollary: Hence it follows that the practice of reason (in its just extent) is the great preparative for death, and the means of advancing our happiness through all our subsequent duration. But moreover,</p>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>. <i>In the future state, respect will be had not only to men’s reasoning and virtues, or the contrary, but also to their enjoyments and sufferings here.</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-646" id="noteref-646" epub:type="noteref">646</a> Because the forementioned inequalities of this world can by no means be redressed, unless men’s enjoyments and sufferings, taken together with their virtues and vices, are compared and balanced. I say “taken together” because no reason can be assigned why a vicious man should be recompensed for the pains and mischiefs and troubles which he brings upon himself by his vices, as the natural consequences of them; nor, on the other side, why any deductions should be made from the future happiness of a good man upon the score of those innocent enjoyments which are the genuine fruit of his moderation, regularity, other virtues, and sound reasoning.</p>
			<p>Corollary: Wicked men will not only be less happy than the wise and virtuous, but be really unhappy in that state to come. For when all the happiness, that answers to those degrees of virtue which they had, and those sufferings which they underwent, above what was the natural effect of their wickedness⁠—I say, when that is subtracted, what remains upon the account will be something below no-happiness: which must be some quantity of positive unhappiness, or misery.</p>
			<p>Thus there will be rewards and punishments hereafter, and men will be happy or unhappy according to their behavior, enjoyments, and sufferings in this present life. But,</p>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>. <i>If the immortality of the soul cannot be demonstrated, yet it is certain the contrary cannot.</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-647" id="noteref-647" epub:type="noteref">647</a> To say, when a house is ruinous and fallen, that it once had an inhabitant, and that he is escaped out of it and lives in some other place, can involve no contradiction or absurdity.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-648" id="noteref-648" epub:type="noteref">648</a> And,</p>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>. <i>If the immortality of the soul should be considered only as a probability, or even as a chance possible, yet still a virtuous life is to be preferred before its contrary.</i> For if the soul be mortal, and all perception perishes forever at our death, what in this case does a good man lose by his virtue? Very rarely more than some acts of devotion and instances of mortification, which too by custom grow habitual and easy,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-649" id="noteref-649" epub:type="noteref">649</a> and it may be pleasant by being (or seeming at least to be) reasonable. On the other hand, what does a vicious man gain? Only such enjoyments as a virtuous man leaves, and those are such as most commonly owe their being to a vitiated taste, grow insipid in time, require more trouble and contrivance to obtain them than they are worth, go off disagreeably, are followed many times by sharp reflections and bitter penances in the rear, and at best: after a short time end in nothing, as if they had never been. This is all.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-650" id="noteref-650" epub:type="noteref">650</a> But then if the soul prove to be immortal (as we have all the reason in the world to think it will), what does the virtuous man gain? His present pleasures (if not so many) are more sincere<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-651" id="noteref-651" epub:type="noteref">651</a> and natural,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-652" id="noteref-652" epub:type="noteref">652</a> and the effect of his self-denials and submission to reason, in order to prepare himself for a future state, is the happiness of that state, which, without pretending to describe it, may be presumed to be immortal, because the soul is so, and to be purer and of a more exalted nature (<abbr class="initialism">i.e.</abbr> truer and greater) than any of these low enjoyments here, because that state is every way in nature above this. And again: what does the wicked man lose? That happiness which the virtuous gain as such; and he sinks, besides, into some degree of the unhappiness of that future state, of which one may say in general that it may be as much greater than the unhappiness or sufferings of this world, as the happiness and joys of that are above those of this.</p>
			<p>In a state that is spiritual and clear, everything will be purer and operate more directly and strongly and (if the expression may be tolerated) with more spirit; there will be fewer obstructions to either happiness or unhappiness, the soul will lie more open, and have more immediate and acute perceptions of either, so that each of them in their kind will be more intense: the one nearer to pure or mere happiness, the other to the contrary.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-653" id="noteref-653" epub:type="noteref">653</a> But to enter further into the nature and economy of the yet unknown world is too arduous an undertaking for my philosopher.</p>
			<p>I shall only add that the reasoning and virtuous man has at least this advantage over the foolish and profligate: that, though his wisdom and virtue cannot always rectify that which is amiss in himself or his circumstances, they will find means to alleviate his pressures and disadvantages, and support him under all the anomalies of life, with comforts of which the other knows nothing⁠—particularly this: the enjoyment of a humble but well-grounded expectation of felicity hereafter, sincere and durable.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-654" id="noteref-654" epub:type="noteref">654</a></p>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span>. <i>He, therefore, who would act according to truth, must, in the last place, not only consider what he is, and how circumstantiated in this present state, and provide accordingly, but further, must consider himself also as one whose existence proceeds on into another, and provide for that too.</i> How I think this is to be done, by this time I hope you fully apprehend.</p>
			<p>For a conclusion of the whole matter: let our conversation in this world, so far as we are concerned and able, be such as acknowledges everything to be <em>what it is</em> (what it is in itself, and what with regard to us, to other beings, to causes, circumstances, consequences); that is: let us by no act deny anything to be true which is true; that is: let us act according to reason; and that is: let us act according to the law of our nature. By honestly endeavoring to do this, we shall express our duty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-655" id="noteref-655" epub:type="noteref">655</a> to Him who is the Author of it, and of that law, and at the same time prosecute our own proper happiness (the happiness of rational beings); we shall do what tends to make us easy here, and be qualifying ourselves and preparing for our removal hence to our long home: that great revolution, which, at the farthest, cannot be very far off.</p>
			<p>And now, Sir, the trouble is almost over for the present, not properly which I give you, but which you have brought upon yourself, these being the Thoughts which you desired⁠—unless I have anywhere misrepresented myself through inadvertence, which I own may be. At the foot of the page I have in some places subjoined a few little strictures, principally of antiquity, after the manner of annotations, such as, when I came to revise these sheets, I could recollect upon the sudden,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-656" id="noteref-656" epub:type="noteref">656</a> having no commonplace book to help me, nor thought of any such thing before that time. They may serve perhaps sometimes a little to explain the text, and sometimes to add weight, but chiefly to divert you, who know very well how to improve any the least hint out of the Ancients, and I fear will want to be diverted. I have also printed a few copies of this Sketch, not with any design to make it public, but merely to save the trouble of transcribing<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-657" id="noteref-657" epub:type="noteref">657</a>⁠—being minded, since I have made it, to leave it not only with you, but perhaps also with two or three other friends, or, however, with my Family, as a private monument of one that meant well. Though, as to the disposal and fate of it, much will depend upon your judgment and manner of acceptance.</p>
			<footer>
				<p>—William Wollaston.</p>
				<p>
					<i dir="rtl" xml:lang="he">מכ״אות״ל</i>
				</p>
				<p>“Who is like unto God?” And “Praised be God.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-658" id="noteref-658" epub:type="noteref">658</a></p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
