<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IV: Of the Obligations of Imperfect Beings with Respect to Their Power of Acting</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="section-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Of the Obligations of Imperfect Beings with Respect to Their Power of Acting</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>There remains yet another question⁠—supposed also to be proposed by an objector⁠—which must not be forgot, and upon which I shall bestow this very short section. The question was this: “If a man can find out truth, may he not want the power of acting agreeably to it?”</p>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <i>Nothing is capable of no obligation.</i> For to oblige <em>nothing</em> is the same as <em>not</em> to oblige.</p>
			<p id="p-3"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <i>So far as any being has no power or opportunity of doing anything, so far is that being incapable of any obligation to do it:</i> or, <i>no being is capable of any obligation to do that which it has not power or opportunity to do.</i> For that being, which has not the faculties or opportunity necessary to the doing of anything, is, in respect of that thing, a being utterly inactive⁠—no agent at all⁠—and therefore, as to that act, nothing at all.</p>
			<p>To require, or command, one to do anything is to require him to apply a power superior to the resistence to be met with in doing it. To require him to apply such a power is the same as to require that his power, of such a kind and degree, be applied. But if he has no such power, then his power of that kind and degree is <em>nothing</em>: and it is nothing that is required to be applied. Therefore, nothing is required to be done. It is just the same as if a man was commanded to do something with his third hand, when he has but two: which would be the same as to bid him to do it with <em>no</em> hand, or <em>not</em> bid him do it.</p>
			<p>Without more ado, it is a truth confessed by everybody, that nobody is obliged to impossibilities.</p>
			<p>From hence will follow, after the manner of corollaries, the two following propositions:</p>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <i>Inanimate and inactive beings are capable of no obligation: nor merely sensitive of any obligation to act upon principles, or motives above sense.</i></p>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <i>The obligations of beings intelligent and active must be proportionable to their faculties, powers, opportunities; and not more.</i></p>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <i>To endeavor may fitly express the use of all the opportunities and powers that any intelligent and active, but imperfect, being has to act.</i> For to endeavor is to do what one can, and this as every such being may do, wherever he stands in the scale of imperfects; so none can do more. One may exert his endeavors with greater advantage or success than another, yet still they are but <em>endeavors</em>.</p>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. <i>The imputations of moral good and evil to beings capable of understanding and acting must be in proportion to their endeavors:</i> or, <i>their obligations reach as far as their endeavors may.</i> This follows again from what has been said; and so does this:</p>
			<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. and lastly, <i>They who are capable of discerning truth, though not all truths, and of acting conformably to it, though not always or in all cases, are nevertheless obliged to do these, as far as they are able:</i> or, <i>it it is the duty of such a being sincerely to endeavor to practice reason; not to contradict any truth, by word or deed; and in short, to treat everything as being what it is.</i></p>
			<p>Thus the general duties of rational beings, mentioned in or resulting from the preceding sections, are brought together and finally fixed under the correction or limitation in this last proposition. This is the sum of their religion, from which no exemption or excuse lies. Everyone can endeavor; everyone can do what he can. But in order to that, everyone ought to be in <em>earnest</em>, and to exert himself <em>heartily</em>: not stifling his own conscience, not dissembling, suppressing, or neglecting his own powers.</p>
			<p>And now, needless to me seem those disputes about human liberty, with which men have tired themselves and the world. The case is much the same as if a man should have some great reward or advantage offered to him, if he would get up and go to such a place to accept it, or do some certain thing for it, and he, instead of going or doing anything, falls into a tedious disquisition about his own freedom: whether he has the power to stir, or whether he is not chained to his seat and necessitated to sit still. The short way of knowing this, certainly, is to try. If he can do nothing, no labor can be lost; but if he is capable of acting, and does not act, the consequences and blame must be justly chargeable upon himself. And, I am persuaded, if men would be serious, and put forth themselves,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-161" id="noteref-161" epub:type="noteref">161</a> that their wills are not so universally and peremptorily determined by what occurs, nor predestination and fate so rigid,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-162" id="noteref-162" epub:type="noteref">162</a> but that much is left to their own conduct.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-163" id="noteref-163" epub:type="noteref">163</a> Up and try.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-164" id="noteref-164" epub:type="noteref">164</a></p>
			<p>Sure it is in a man’s power to keep his hand from his mouth; if it is, it is also in his power to forbear excess in eating and drinking. If he has the command of his own feet, so as to go either this way or that or no whither, as sure he has, it is in his power to abstain from ill company and vicious places. And so on.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-165" id="noteref-165" epub:type="noteref">165</a></p>
			<p>This suggests a very material thought: that <em>forbearances</em>, at least in all ordinary cases, are within our power;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-166" id="noteref-166" epub:type="noteref">166</a> so that a man may, if he will, forbear to do that which contradicts truth; but where acting is required, that very often is not in his power. He may want abilities, or opportunities, and so may seem to contradict truth by his omission, which, if his infirmities and disadvantages were taken into the account, and the case was rightly stated, he would be found not to do.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
