<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Section 7</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="section-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 id="sect7"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. Truths Respecting Particular Societies of Men, or Governments</h2>
			<p><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. Man is a social creature: that is, a single man, or family, cannot subsist, or not well, alone out of all society.</b> More things are necessary to sustain life, or at least to make it in any degree pleasant and desirable, than it is possible for any one man to make and provide for himself merely by his own labor and ingenuity. Meat, and drink, and clothing, and house, and that frugal furniture which is absolutely requisite, with a little necessary physic, suppose many arts and trades, many heads, and many hands. If he could make a shift in time of health to live as a wild man under the protection of trees and rocks, feeding upon such fruits, herbs, roots, and other things, as the earth should afford, and happen to present to him; yet what could he do in sickness, or old age, when he would not be able to stir out, or receive her beneficence. </p>
			<p> If he should take from the other sex such a help, as the common appetite might prompt him to seek, or he might happen to meet with in his walks; yet still if the hands are doubled, the wants are doubled too: nay more, additional wants, and great ones, attending the bearing and education of children. </p>
			<p> If we could suppose all these difficulties surmounted, and a family grown up, and doing what a single family is capable of doing by itself; supporting themselves by gardening, a little agriculture, or a few cattle, which they have somehow got, and tamed (though even this would be hard for them to do, having no markets, where they might exchange the produce of their husbandry, or of their little flock, or herd for other things; no shops to repair to for tools; no servant, or laborer to assist; nor any public invention, of which they might serve themselves in the preparation of their grain, dressing their meat, manufacturing their wool, and the like); yet still it is only the cortex of the man, which is provided for: what must become of the interior part, the minds of these people? How would those be fed, and improved?<a href="../text/notes.xhtml#note-405" id="note-405" epub:type="noteref">405</a> Arts and sciences, so much of them as is necessary to teach men the use of their faculties, and unfold their reason, are not the growth of single families so employed. And yet for men to lay out all their pains and time in procuring only what is proper to keep the blood and humors in circulation, without any further views, or any regard to the nobler part of themselves, is utterly incongruous to the idea of a being formed for rational exercises. </p>
			<p> If all the exceptions against this separate way of living could be removed; yet as mankind increases, the little plots, which the several families possess, and cultivate, must be enlarged, or multiplied: by degrees they would find themselves straitened: and there would soon be a collision of interests, from whence disputes and quarrels would ensue. Other things too might minister matter for these. And besides all this, some men are naturally troublesome, vicious, thievish, pugnacious, rabid; and these would always be disturbing and flying upon the next to them: as others are ambitious, or covetous, and, if they happen to have any advantage or superiority in power, would not fail to make themselves yet greater or stronger by eating up their neighbors, till by repeated encroachments they might grow to be formidable.<a href="../text/notes.xhtml#note-406" id="note-406" epub:type="noteref">406</a> </p>
			<p> Under so many wants, and such apprehensions, or present dangers, necessity would bring some families into terms of friendship with others for mutual comfort and defence: and this, as the reason of it increased, would become stronger, introduce stricter engagements, and at last bring the people to mix and unite. And then the weak being glad to shelter themselves under the protection and conduct of the more able, and so naturally giving way for these to ascend, the several sorts would at length settle into their places, according to their several weights and capacities with respect to the common concern. And thus some form of a society must arise: men cannot subsist otherwise. </p>
			<p> But if it was possible for a man to preserve life by himself, or with his petit company about him: yet nobody can deny, that it would be infinitely <em>better</em> for him, and them, to live in a society, where men are serviceable to themselves and their neighbors at the same time, by exchanging their money, or goods, for such other things as they want more; where they are capable of doing good offices each for other in time of need; where they have the protection of laws, and a public security against cheats, robbers, assassins, and all enemies to property; where a common force or army is ready to interpose between them and foreign invaders; and where they may enjoy those discoveries which have been made in arts and learning, may improve their faculties by conversation and innocent conflicts of reason, and (to speak out) may be made men. </p>
			<p> If, when we have the privilege of society and laws, we can scarce preserve our own, or be safe, what a woeful condition should we be in <em>without them</em>; exposed to the insults, rapines, and violence of unjust and merciless men, not having any sanctuary, anything to take refuge in? So again, if notwithstanding the help offriends and those about us, and such conveniencies as may be had in cities and peopled places, we are forced to bear many pains and melancholy hours, how irksome would life be, if in sickness or other trouble there was nobody to administer either remedy or consolation? </p>
			<p> Lastly, society is what men generally <em>desire</em>. And though much company may be attended with much vanity, and occasion many evils,<a href="../text/notes.xhtml#note-407" id="note-407" epub:type="noteref">407</a> yet it is certain, that absolute and perpetual solitude has something in it very irksome and hideous.<a href="../text/notes.xhtml#note-408" id="note-408" epub:type="noteref">408</a> Thus the social life is natural to man; or, what his nature and circumstances require. </p>
			<p><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. The end of society is the common welfare and good of the people associated.</b> This is but the consequence of what has been just said. For because men cannot subsist well, or not so well, separately, therefore they unite into greater bodies: that is, the end of their uniting is their better subsistence; and by how much their manner of living becomes better, by so much the more effectually is this end answered. </p>
			<p><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. A society, into which men enter for this end, supposes some rules or laws, according to which they agree all to be governed, with a power of altering or adding to them as occasion shall require.</b> A number of men met together without any rules, by which they submit to be governed, can be nothing but an irregular multitude. Everyone being still <i xml:lang="la">sui juris</i>, and left entirely to his own private choice, by whatever kind of judgment or passion or caprice that happens to be determined, they must needs interfere one with another: nor can such a concourse of people be anything different from an indigested chaos of dissenting parts, which by their confused motions would damnify, and destroy each other. This must be true, if men differ the size of their understandings, in their manner of thinking, and the several turns their minds take from their education, way of living, and other circumstances; if the greatest part of them are under the direction of bodily affections; and if these differ as much as their shapes, their complexions, their constitutions do.<a href="../text/notes.xhtml#note-409" id="note-409" epub:type="noteref">409</a> Here then we find nothing but confusion and unhappiness. </p>
			<p> Such a combination of men therefore, as may produce their common good and happiness, must be such a one as, in the first place, may render them compatible one with another: which cannot be without rules, that may direct and adjust their several mations and carriages towards each other, bring them to some degree of uniformity, or at least restrain such excursions and enormities, as would render their living together inconsistent. </p>
			<p> Then, there must be some express declarations and <i xml:lang="la">scita</i> to ascertain properties, and titles to things by common consent: that so, when any altercations or disputes shall happen concerning them (as be sure many must in a world so unreasonable and prone to iniquity), the appeal may be made to their own settlements; and by the application of a general undisputed rule to the particular case before them it may appear, on which side the obliquity lies, the controversy may be fairiy decided, and all mouths eternally stopped. And then again, that they may be protected and persevere in this agreeable life, and the enjoyment of their respective properties be secured to them, several things must be forecasted by way of precaution against foreign invasions; punishments must be appointed for offences: committed among themselves, which being known may deter men from committing them, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> These rules, methods, and appointments of punishments, being intelligibly and honestly drawn up, agreed to, and published, are the mutual compacts<a href="../text/notes.xhtml#note-410" id="note-410" epub:type="noteref">410</a> under which the society is confederated, and the laws of it. </p>
			<p> If then to have the members of a society capable of subsisting together, if to have their respective properties ascertained, if to be safe and quiet in the possession of them be for the general good of the society, and these things cannot be had without laws; then a society, whose foundation and cement is the public good, must have such laws, or be supposed at least to design such. </p>
			<p> As to the making of any further laws, when the public interest and welfare require them, that is but repeating the same power in other instances, which they made use of before in making their first laws: and as to altering or repealing, it is certain the power of making and unmaking here are equal. Besides, when men are incorporated and live together for their mutual good, this end to be considered at one time as much as at another; not only in their first constitution and settlement. </p>
			<p id="s7p4"><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. These laws and determinations must be such, as are not inconsistent with natural justice.</b> For 1. To ordain anything that interferes with truth is the same as to ordain, that what is true shall be false; or vice-versa<a href="../text/notes.xhtml#note-411" id="note-411" epub:type="noteref">411</a> which is absurd. 2. To pretend by a law to make that to be just, which before and in itself was unjust, is the same as to ordain that which interferes with truth: because justice is founded in truth (as before), and everywhere the same.<a href="../text/notes.xhtml#note-412" id="note-412" epub:type="noteref">412</a> Therefore, 3. by a law to enact anything which is naturally unjust is to enact that which is absurd: that which by <a href="section-1.xhtml#sect1">Section <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></a> is morally evil; and that which is opposite to those laws, by which it is manifestly the will of our Creator we should be governed.<a href="../text/notes.xhtml#note-413" id="note-413" epub:type="noteref">413</a> And to enact what is thus evil must be evil indeed. Lastly, to establish injustice must be utterly inconsistent with the general good and happiness of any society; unless to be unjustly treated, pilled, and abused can be happiness.<a href="../text/notes.xhtml#note-414" id="note-414" epub:type="noteref">414</a> And if so, it is utterly inconsistent with the end of society; or, it is to deny that to be the end of it, which is the end of it. </p>
			<p><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. A society limited by laws supposes magistrates, and a subordination of powers: that is, it supposes a government of some form or other.</b> Because, where men are to act by rules or laws for the public weal, some must of necessity be appointed to judge, when those laws, are transgressed, and how far; to decide doubtful cases, and the like: there must be some armed with authority to execute those judgments, and to punish offenders: there must be persons chosen not only to punish and prevent public evils, but also to do many other things, which will be required in advancement of the public good: and then the power of making new laws, and abrogating or mending old ones, as experience may direct or the case at any time require, as also of providing presently and legally for the safety of the public in time of sudden danger, must be lodged somewhere. </p>
			<p> If there are no executors of the laws the laws cannot be executed: and if so, they are but a dead letter, and equal to none: and if the society has none, it is indeed no society, or not such a one as is the subject of this proposition. Guardians and executors of laws are therefore the vitals of a society, without which there can be no circulation of justice in it, no care of it taken, nor can it continue. And since men can be but in in one place at once, there must be numbers of these proportionable to the bigness and extent of it. </p>
			<p> And further, since the concerns of a whole society, and such things as may fall within the compass of a statute book, are various, requiring several sorts and sizes of abilities, and lying one above another in nature; since not only private men want to be inspected, but even magistrates and officers themselves, who (though they oft forget it) are still but men; and since the whole society is to be one, one compact body: I say, since the case is thus, there must be men to act in several elevations and qualities as well as places, of which the inferior sort in their several quarters must act immediately under their respective superiors; and so this class of superiors in their several provinces under others above them; till at last the ascent is terminated in some head, where the legislative power is deposited, and from whence spirits and motion are communicated though the whole body. An army may as well be supposed to be well disciplined, well provided, and well conducted without either general or officers, as a society without governors and their subalterns, or (which is the same) without some form of government, to answer the end of its being. </p>
			<p><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. A man may part with some of his natural rights, and put himself under the government of laws, and those, who in their several stations are, entrusted with the execution of them, in order to gain the protection of them, and the privileges of a regular society.</b> Because by this he does but exchange one thing for another, which he reckons equivalent, or indeed preferable by much: and this he may do without acting against any truth. For the liberties and natural rights, which he exchanges, are his own, and therefore no other man’s property is denied by this: nor is the nature of happiness denied to be what it is, since it is happiness which he aims at in doing this. On the contrary, he would rather offend against truth, and deny happiness to be what it is, if he did not do it; especially seeing, that here his own happiness coincides with the general happiness and more convenient being of the kingdom or commonwealth, where his lot falls, or his choice determines him to live. </p>
			<p> If the question should be asked, <em>what</em> natural rights a man may part with, or how far he may part with them; the general answer, I think, may be this. Some things are essential to our being, and some it is not in our power to part with. As to the rest, he may depart from them so far as it is consistent with the end, for which he does this: not further, because beyond that lies a contradiction. A man cannot give away the natural right and property he has in anything, in order to preserve or retain that property: but he may consent to contribute part of his estate, in order to preserve the rest, when otherwise it might all be lost; to take his share of danger in defence of his country, rather than certainty perish, be enslaved, or ruined by the conquest or oppression of it; and the like. </p>
			<p><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. Men may become members of a society (i.e. do what is mentioned in the foregoing proposition) by giving their consent, either explicitly, or implicitly.</b> That a man may subject himself to laws, we have seen. If he does this, he must do it either in his own person; or he must do it by some proxy, whom he substitutes in his room to agree to public laws; or his consent must be collected only from the conformity of his carriage, his adhering to the society, accepting the benefits of its constitution, and acquiescing in the established methods and what is done by virtue of them. By the two first ways he declares himself explicitly, and directly: nor can he after that behave himself as if he was no member of the society, without acting as if he had not done what he has done. And this is the case not only of them, who have been concerned in the first formation of any government, but also of them, who have in the said manners<a href="../text/notes.xhtml#note-415" id="note-415" epub:type="noteref">415</a> given their consent to any subsequent acts, by which they owned, confirmed, and came into what their ancestors had done, or who have by oaths put themselves under obligations to the public. By the last of the three ways mentioned a man’s consent is given indeed implicitly, and less directly: but yet it is given, and he becomes a party. For suppose him to be born in some certain kingdom or commonwealth, but never to have been party to any law, never to have taken any oath to the government, nor ever formally to have engaged himself by any other act. In this case he cannot methinks but have some love and sympathy for that place, which afforded him the first air he drew; some gratitude towards that constitution, which protected his parents, while they educated and provided for him; some regard to those obligations, under which perhaps they have laid him, and with which limitations as it were they (or rather the Governor of the world by them) conveyed to him his very life. </p>
			<p> If he inherits or takes anything by the laws of the place, to which he has no indefeasible right in nature, or which, if he had a natural right to it, he could not tell how to get, or keep, without the aid of laws and advantage of society; then, when he takes this inheritance, or whatever it is, with it he takes and owns the laws which give it him. </p>
			<p> Indeed since the security he has from the laws of the country in respect of his person, and rights, whatever they either are, or may happen to be hereafter, is the general equivalent for his submission to them, he cannot accept that without being obliged in equity to pay this. </p>
			<p> Nay, lastly, his very continuing and settling in any place shows, that either he likes the constitution, or likes it better than any other, or at least thinks it better in his circumstances to conform to it than to seek any other: that is, he consents to be comprehended in it.<a href="../text/notes.xhtml#note-416" id="note-416" epub:type="noteref">416</a> </p>
			<p><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. When a man is become a member of a society, if he would behave himself according to truth, he ought to do these things:</b><abbr xml:lang="la">viz.</abbr> to consider property as founded not only in nature, but also in law; and men’s titles to what they have, as strengthened by that, and even by his own concession and covenants; and therefore by so mueb the more inviolable and sacred: instead of taking such measures to do himself right, when he is molested, or injured, as his own prudence might suggest in a state of nature, to confine himself to such ways as are with his own consent marked out for him: and, in a word, to behave himself according to his subordination or place in the community, and to observe the laws of it. For it is contained in the idea of a law, that it is intended to be observed: and therefore he, who is a party to any laws, or professes himself member of a society formed upon laws, cannot willingly transgress those laws without denying laws to be what they are, or himself to be what he is supposed or professes himself to be: and indeed without contradicting all or more of those truths contained in the foregoing propositions. </p>
			<p><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. In respect of those things, which the laws of the place take no cognizance of, or when if they do take cognizance of them, the benefit of those laws cannot be had</b> (for so it may sometimes happen. I say, in respect of such things), <b>he who is a member of a society in other respects retains his natural liberty, is still as it were in a state of nature, and must endeavor to act according to truth and his best prudence.</b> For in the former case there is nothing to limit him, by the suppositiom, but truth and nature. And in the other it is the same as if there was nothing; since in effect there is no law, where no effect or benefit from it is to be had. As, for example, if a man should be attacked by thieves or murderers, and has no opportunity or power to call the proper magistrate or officer to his assistance. </p>
			<p> There is a third case, which perhaps may demand admission here: and that is, when laws are plainly contrary to truth and natural justice. For though they may pass the usual forms, and be styled laws; yet, since no such law can abrogate that law of nature and reason, to which the Author of our being has subjected us, or make falsehood to be truth; and two inconsistent laws cannot both oblige, or subsist together; one of them must give way; and it is easy to discern, which ought to do it.<a href="../text/notes.xhtml#note-417" id="note-417" epub:type="noteref">417</a> </p>
			<p> There remains one truth more to be annexed here, which may be contradicted by the practices and pretences of Enthusiasts.<a href="../text/notes.xhtml#note-418" id="note-418" epub:type="noteref">418</a> </p>
			<p><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>. The societies intended in this section, such as kingdoms and commonwealths, may defend themselves against other nations:</b> or, <b>war may lawfully be waged in defence and for the security of a society, its members and territories, or for reparation of injuries.</b> For if one man may in a state of nature have a right to defend himself, (see <a href="section-6.xhtml#s6p7">Section <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span></a>) two may, or three, and so on. Nay, perhaps two may have a double right, three a threefold right, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> At least, if the right be not greater, the concern is greater: and there will be more reason, that two, or three, or more should be saved, than one only; and therefore that two, or three, or more should defend themselves, than that one should. And if this may be done by men in a state of nature, it may be done by them when confederated among themselves: because with respect to other nations they are still in that state. I mean, I so far as they have not limited themselves by leagues and alliances. </p>
			<p> Besides, if a man may defend himself, he may defend himself by what methods he thinks most proper, provided he trespasses against no truth; and therefore, by getting the aid and assistance of others. Now when war is levied in defence of the public, and the people in general, the thing may be considered as if every particular man was defending himself with the assistance of all the rest, and so be turned into the same case with that of a single man. </p>
			<p> In truth the condition of a nation seems to be much the same with that of a single person when there is no law, or no benefit of law, to be had: and what one man may do to another in that position, may be done by one nation or politic body with respect to another: and perhaps by this rule, regard being had to what has been delivered in <a href="section-6.xhtml#sect6">Section <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span></a> the justice of foreign wars may be not untruly estimated. </p>
			<p> Mutual defence is one of the great ends of society, if not the greatest, and in a particular and eminent manner involves in it defence against foreign enemies. And whoever signalizes himself, when there is occasion for his service, merits the grateful acknowledgements and celebrations of his countrymen: so far at least as he acts generously and with a public spirit, and not in pursuance only of private views. </p>
			<p> As to those wars, which are undertaken by men out of ambition,<a href="../text/notes.xhtml#note-419" id="note-419" epub:type="noteref">419</a> merely to enlarge empire, or to show the world, how terrible they are; how many men they are able to slay, how many slaves to make,<a href="../text/notes.xhtml#note-420" id="note-420" epub:type="noteref">420</a> how many families to drive from their peaceful habitations, and, in short, how much mischief and misery they are able to bring upon mankind; these are founded upon false nations of glory: embellished indeed by servile wits and misplaced eloquence, but condemned by all true philosophy and religion. </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
