<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Section 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="section-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">Truths Relating to the Deity: Of His Existence, Perfection, Providence, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></span>
			</h2>
			<p>I have shown in what the nature of moral good and evil consists: <abbr>viz.</abbr> a conformity or disagreement to truth, and those things that are coincident with it, reason and happiness; also, how truth is discovered: by sense, or reason, or both. I shall now specify some of those truths which are of greatest importance and influence, and require more reasoning to discover them; leaving the rest (common matters of fact) to the common ways of finding them. They respect principally either the Deity, or ourselves, or the rest of mankind. The first sort are the subject of this section.</p>
			<p id="p-2"><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. Where there is a subordination of causes and effects, there must necessarily be a cause in nature prior to the rest, uncaused.</b> Or thus, <b>Where there is a series, in which the existence of one thing depends upon another, the existence of this again upon same other, and so upwards, as the case shall be, there must be some independent being, upon whom it does originally depend.</b></p>
			<p>If Z (some body) be put into motion by Y, Y by X, and X by W, it is plain that X moves Y, and Y moves Z only as they are first moved, X by W, and Y by X: that Z, Y, X are <em>moveds</em>, or rather Z more Y more X, taken together,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-164" id="note-164" epub:type="noteref">164</a> are <em>one moved</em>; that W stands here as the first mover, or author of the motion, unmoved by any other; that therefore without W there would be a <em>moved</em> without a <em>mover</em>, which is absurd;<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-165" id="note-165" epub:type="noteref">165</a> and lastly, that of what length soever the series may be, the case will be ever the same: <abbr class="initialism">i.e.</abbr> if there be no First mover,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-166" id="note-166" epub:type="noteref">166</a> unmoved, there must be a moved without a mover.</p>
			<p>Further, if W, whom we will suppose to be an intelligent being, and to have a power of beginning motion, has this power originally in himself and independently of all others, then, here, not only the first mover in this series, but a <em>First being</em> and original cause is found. Because that, which has a power of beginning motion independent of any other, is a <em>mover independent</em>, and therefore is independent, or has an independent existence, since nothing can be a mover without <em>being</em>. But if W has not this power independently in himself, then he must receive it from some other, upon whom he depends, and whom we will call V. If then V has a power of conferring a faculty of producing motion, originally and independently in himself, here will be a First, independent cause. And if it can be supposed that he has it not thus, and that the series should rise too high for us to follow it, yet however we cannot but conclude that there is <em>some</em> such cause, upon whom this train of beings and powers must depend, if we reason as in the former paragraph. For,</p>
			<p>Universally, if Z be any effect whatsoever, proceeding from or depending upon Y as the cause of its existence, Y upon X, X upon W, it is manifest that the existence of all⁠—Z, Y, X⁠—does originally come from W, which stands here as the Supreme cause, depending upon nothing: and that, without it, X could not be, and consequently neither Y, nor Z. Z, Y, X, being all effects (or dependents), or rather Z more Y more X <em>one effect</em>, without W there would be an effect without a cause. Lastly, let this retrogression from effects to their causes be continued ever so far, the same thing will still recur, and without such a cause as is before mentioned the whole will be an effect without an efficient, or a dependent without anything to depend upon: <abbr class="initialism">i.e.</abbr> dependent, and not dependent.</p>
			<p>Objection: The series may ascend <em>infinitely</em>,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-167" id="note-167" epub:type="noteref">167</a> and for that reason have no first mover or cause. Answer: If a series of bodies moved can be supposed to be infinite, then, taken together, it will be equal to an <em>infinite body</em> moved, and this moved will not less require a mover than a finite body, but infinitely more. If I may not be permitted to place a first mover at the top of the series, because it is supposed to be infinite and to have no beginning, yet still there must of necessity be <em>some</em> cause or author of the motion,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-168" id="note-168" epub:type="noteref">168</a> different from all these bodies, because their being (by the supposition) no one body in the series that moves the next, but only in consequence of its being moved first itself, there is no one of them that is not <em>moved</em>, and the whole can be considered together but as an infinite body moved, and which must therefore be moved by <em>something</em>.</p>
			<p>The same kind of answer holds good in respect of all effects and their causes in general. An infinite succession of effects will require an infinite efficient, or a cause infinitely effective: so far is it from requiring none.</p>
			<p>Suppose a chain<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-169" id="note-169" epub:type="noteref">169</a> hung down out of the heavens from an unknown height, and though every link of it gravitated toward the earth, and what it hung upon was not visible, yet it did not descend, but kept its situation, and upon this a question should arise: “What supported or kept up this chain?” Would it be a sufficient answer to say that the first (or lowest) link hung upon the second (or that next above it), the second, or rather the first and second together, upon the third, and so on <i xml:lang="la">ad infinitum</i>? For what holds up the <em>whole</em>? A chain of ten links would fall down, unless something able to bear it hindered; one of twenty, if not stayed by something of a yet greater strength, in proportion to the increase of weight; and therefore one of <em>infinite</em> links certainly, if not sustained by something <em>infinitely</em> strong, and capable to bear up an infinite weight. And thus it is in a chain of causes and effects<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-170" id="note-170" epub:type="noteref">170</a> tending, or, as it were, gravitating, towards some end. The last (or lowest) depends, or (as one may say) is suspended upon, the cause above it; this again, if it be not the first cause, is suspended as an effect upon something above it, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr><a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-171" id="note-171" epub:type="noteref">171</a> And if they should be infinite, unless (agreeably to what has been said) there is some cause upon which all hang or depend, they would be but an infinite effect without an efficient: and to assert there is any such thing, would be as great an absurdity as to say that a finite or little weight wants something to sustain it, but an infinite one or the greatest does not.</p>
			<p id="p-9"><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. A Cause or Being, that has in nature no superior cause, and therefore</b> (by the terms) <b>is also unproduced, and independent, must be self-existent; <abbr class="initialism">i.e.</abbr> existence must be essential to him;</b> or, <b>such is his nature, that he cannot but be.</b><a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-172" id="note-172" epub:type="noteref">172</a> For every being must either either exist of itself, or not of itself; that which exists not of itself must derive its existence from some other, and so be dependent; but the Being mentioned in the proposition is supposed to be independent, and uncaused. Therefore He must exist, not this way, but the other. The root of His existence can be sought for nowhere but in His own nature; to place it anywhere else is to make a cause superior to the Supreme.</p>
			<p id="p-10"><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. There must be such a Being.</b> For (besides what has been said already) if there was not at least one such Being, nothing could be at all.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-173" id="note-173" epub:type="noteref">173</a> For the universe could not produce itself,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-174" id="note-174" epub:type="noteref">174</a> nor could any part of it produce itself and then produce the rest, because this is supposing a thing to <em>act</em> before it <em>is</em>.</p>
			<p id="p-11"><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. Such a Being as is before described, must not only be eternal, but infinite.</b> Eternal He must be, because there is no way by which such a Being can either begin or cease to be, existence being of His essence. And infinite He must be, because He can be limited by no other as to his existence. For if there was any being able to limit Him, He must be inferior to that being. He must also in that case be dependent, because he must be beholden to that being for his being what He is, and that He is not confined within narrower limits. Besides, if His presence (whatever the manner of it is) was anywhere excluded, He would not be there; and if not there, He might be supposed to be not elsewhere; and thus he might be supposed not to be at all. But such a Being, as is described in <a href="#p-9">proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></a> cannot so much as be <em>supposed</em> not to be.</p>
			<p id="p-12"><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Such a Being is above all things that fall under our cognizance, and therefore his manner of existence is above all our conceptions.</b> For He is a necessary existent, but nothing within our comprehension is of this kind. We know no being, but what we can <em>imagine not to be</em> without any contradiction or repugnance to nature; nor do we know of any besides this Supreme being himself. For with respect to Him, indeed we know, by reasoning, that there must be One being who cannot be supposed not to be, just as certainly as we know there is anything at all; though we cannot know Him, and how he exists. Adequate ideas of eternity<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-175" id="note-175" epub:type="noteref">175</a> and infinity are above us, us finites.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-176" id="note-176" epub:type="noteref">176</a></p>
			<p>In inquiring after the causes of things, when we find (or suppose) this to be the cause of that, another thing to be the cause of this again, and so on, if we can proceed, it may always be demanded with respect to the last cause that we can comprehend, “What is the cause of that?” So that it is not possible for us to terminate our inquiries of this kind but in something which is to us incomprehensible. And therefore the Supreme cause must certainly be such.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-177" id="note-177" epub:type="noteref">177</a> But though it is impossible for us to have an adequate notion of his manner of existence, yet we may be sure that,</p>
			<p id="p-14"><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. He exists in a manner which is perfect.</b> For He, who exists of himself, depends in no regard upon any other, and (as being a Supreme cause) is the fountain of existence to other beings, must exist in the <em>uppermost</em> and <em>best</em> manner of existing. And not only so, but (since He is infinite and illimited) He must exist in the best manner <em>illimitedly</em> and <em>infinitely</em>. Now to exist thus is infinite goodness of existence, and to exist in a manner infinitely good is to be <em>perfect</em>.</p>
			<p id="p-15"><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. There can be but One such Being.</b><a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-178" id="note-178" epub:type="noteref">178</a> That is, as it appears by <a href="#p-10">proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span></a> that there must be at least <em>one</em> independent Being, such as is mentioned in <a href="#p-2">proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></a>, so now that in reality there is <em>but One</em>.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-179" id="note-179" epub:type="noteref">179</a> Because his manner of existence being perfect and illimited, that manner of being (if I may speak so) is <em>exhausted</em> by Him, or belongs solely to Him.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-180" id="note-180" epub:type="noteref">180</a> If any other could partake with Him in it, He must want what that other had; be deficient and limited. Infinite and illimited enclose all.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-181" id="note-181" epub:type="noteref">181</a></p>
			<p>If there could be two Beings, each by himself absolutely perfect, they must be either of the same or of different natures. Of the same they cannot be, because thus, both being infinite, their existences would be concident: that is, they would be but the same or one. Nor can they be of different natures, because if their natures were opposite or contrary the one to the other, being equal (infinite both and everywhere meeting the one with the other), the one would just destroy or be the negation of the other;<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-182" id="note-182" epub:type="noteref">182</a> and if they are supposed to be only different, not opposite, then if they differ as disparates, there must be some genus above them, which cannot be; and however they differ, they can only be said, at most, to be beings perfect in their respective kinds. But this is not to be absolutely perfect; it is only to be perfect in this or that respect: and to be only thus implies imperfection in other respects.</p>
			<p>What has been here said is, methinks, sufficient to ruin the Manichean cause and exclude the independent principle of evil. For if we cannot account for the existence of that evil which we find, by experience, to be in the world, it is but one instance out of many of our ignorance. There may be reasons for it, though we do not know them. And certainly no such experience must make us deny axioms or truths equally certain.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-183" id="note-183" epub:type="noteref">183</a> There are, besides, some things relating to this subject which deserve our attention. For as to <em>moral</em> good and evil, they seem to depend upon ourselves.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-184" id="note-184" epub:type="noteref">184</a> If we do but endeavor, the most we can, to do what we ought, we shall not be guilty of not doing it (<a href="section-4.xhtml">section <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span></a>), and therefore it is our fault, and not to be charged upon any other being,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-185" id="note-185" epub:type="noteref">185</a> if guilt and evil be introduced by our neglect or abuse of our own liberty and powers.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-186" id="note-186" epub:type="noteref">186</a> Then as to <em>physical</em> evil: without it much physical <em>good</em> would be lost, the one necessarily inferring the other.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-187" id="note-187" epub:type="noteref">187</a> Some things <em>seem</em> to be evil, which would not appear to be such if we could see through the whole contexture of things.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-188" id="note-188" epub:type="noteref">188</a> There are not more evil than good things in the world, but surely more of the latter.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-189" id="note-189" epub:type="noteref">189</a> Many evils of this kind, as well as of the former, come by our own fault; some perhaps by way of punishment, some of physic,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-190" id="note-190" epub:type="noteref">190</a> and some as the means to happiness not otherwise to be obtained. And if there is a future state, that which seems to be wrong <em>now</em> may be rectified <em>hereafter</em>. To all which more may yet be added. As: that matter is not capable of perfection, and therefore where that is concerned, there must be imperfections, and consequently evils.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-191" id="note-191" epub:type="noteref">191</a> So that to ask why God permits evil, is to ask why he permits a material world, or such a being as man is:<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-192" id="note-192" epub:type="noteref">192</a> endowed indeed with some noble faculties, but encumbered at the same time with bodily passions and propensions. Nay, I know not whether it be not to ask why He permits any imperfect being, and that is, any being at all⁠—which is a bold demand, and the answer to it lies perhaps too deep for us. If this world be designed for a <i xml:lang="grc">palæstra</i>, where men<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-193" id="note-193" epub:type="noteref">193</a> are to exercise their faculties and their virtues, and by that prepare themselves for a superior state<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-194" id="note-194" epub:type="noteref">194</a> (and who can say it is not?), there must be difficulties and temptations, occasions and opportunities for this exercise. Lastly, if there are evils of which men know not the true origin, yet if they would but seriously reflect upon the many marks of reason, wisdom, and goodness everywhere to be observed, in instances which they <em>do</em> or <em>may</em> understand, they could scarce doubt but the same things prevailed in those which they do <em>not</em> understand. If I should meet with a book, the author of which I found had disposed his matter in beautiful order, and treated his subjects with reason and exactness, but at last, as I read on, came to a few leaves written in a language which I did not know: in this case I should close the book with a full persuasion that the same vein of good sense which showed itself in the former and much greater part of it, ran through the other also, especially having arguments <i xml:lang="la">à priori</i> which obliged me to believe that the author of it all was the same person. This I should certainly do, rather than deny the force of those arguments in order to assert two authors of the same book. But the evil principle has led me too far out of my way, therefore to return:</p>
			<p><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. All other beings depend upon that Being mentioned in the foregoing propositions for their existence.</b> For since there can be but one perfect and independent being, the rest must be imperfect and dependent; and since there is nothing else upon which they can ultimately depend, besides Him, upon Him they must and do depend.</p>
			<p><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. He is therefore the Author of nature; nor can anything be, or be done, but what He either causes (immediately or mediately) or permits.</b> All beings (by the last) depend upon Him for their existence; upon whom depends their existence, upon him also must depend the intrinsic manner of their existence, or the <em>natures</em> of these beings; and again, upon whom depend their being and nature, upon Him depend the <em>necessary effects</em> and <em>consequences</em> of their being, and being such as they are in themselves. Then, as to the acts of such of them as may be free agents, and the effects of them, He is indeed <em>not</em> the Author of those, because, by the terms and supposition, they proceed from agents who have no necessity imposed upon them by Him to act either this or that way. But yet however these <em>free agents</em> must depend upon Him <em>as such</em>: from Him they derive their power of acting, and it is He who permits them to use their liberty, though many times, through their own fault, they use it amiss. And, lastly, as to the nature of those relations which lie between ideas or things really existing, or which arise from facts already done and past, these result from the natures of the things themselves⁠—all which the Supreme being either causes or permits (as before). For since things can be but in one manner at once, and their mutual relations, ratios, agreements, disagreements, <abbr>etc.</abbr> are nothing but their manners of being with respect to each other, the natures of these relations will be determined by the natures of the things.</p>
			<p>From hence, now it appears that whatever expresses the existences or nonexistences of things, and their mutual relations as they are, is true by the constitution of nature; and if so, it must also be agreeable to His perfect <em>comprehension</em> of all truth, and to His <em>will</em>, who is at the head of it. Though the act of A (some free agent) is the effect of his liberty, and can only be said to be <em>permitted</em> by the Supreme being; yet when it is once done, the relation between the doer and the deed, the agreement there is between A and the idea of one who has committed such a fact, is a fixed relation. From thenceforward it will always be predicable of him, that he was the doer of it: and if anyone should deny this, he would go counter to nature and that great Author of it, whole existence is now proved. And thus those arguments in <a href="section-1.xhtml#p-17">section <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span></a> which turned only upon a <em>supposition</em> that there was such a Being, are here confirmed and made absolute.</p>
			<p>
				<b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>. The one supreme and perfect Being, upon whom the existence of all other beings and their powers originally depend, is that Being whom I mean by the word “God.”</b>
			</p>
			<p>There are other truths still remaining in relation to the Deity, which we may know, and which are necessary to be known by us, if we would endeavor to demean ourselves toward Him according to truth and what He is. And, they are such as not only tend to rectify our opinions concerning His nature and attributes, but also may serve at the same time as further proof of His existence, and an amplification of some things touched perhaps too lightly. As,</p>
			<p><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>. God cannot be corporeal:</b> or, <b>there can be no corporeity in God.</b> There are many things in matter utterly inconsistent with the nature of such a Being as it has been demonstrated God must be.</p>
			<p>Matter exists in parts, every one of which, by the term, is imperfect;<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-195" id="note-195" epub:type="noteref">195</a> but in a Being absolutely perfect, there can be nothing that is imperfect.</p>
			<p>These parts, though they are many times kept closely united by some occult influence, are in truth so many distinct bodies, which may, at least in our imagination, be disjoined or placed otherwise; nor can we have any idea of matter, which does not imply a natural discerpibility and susceptivity of various shapes and modifications: <abbr class="initialism">i.e.</abbr> mutability seems to be essential to it. But God, existing in a manner that is perfect, exists in a manner that must be uniform, always one and the same, and in nature unchangeable.</p>
			<p>Matter is incapable of acting, passive only, and stupid: which are defects that can never be ascribed to him who is the First cause or Prime agent, the Supreme intellect, and altogether perfect.</p>
			<p>Then, if He is corporeal, wherever there is a vacuum, He must be excluded, and so becomes a being bounded, finite, and, as it were, full of chasms.</p>
			<p>Lastly, there is no matter or body which may not be <em>supposed not to be</em>; whereas the idea of God, or that Being upon whom all others depend, involves in it existence.</p>
			<p><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>. Neither infinite space, nor infinite duration, nor matter infinitely extended or eternally existing, nor any, nor all of these taken together, can be God.</b><a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-196" id="note-196" epub:type="noteref">196</a> For,</p>
			<p>Space, taken separately from the things which possess and fill it, is but an empty scene or vacuum; and to say that infinite space is God, or that God is infinite space, is to say that He is an infinite vacuum, than which nothing can be more absurd or blasphemous. How can space, which is but a vast void, rather the negation of all things than positively anything, a kind of diffused nothing; how can this, I say, be the First cause, <abbr>etc.</abbr> or indeed any cause? What attributes besides penetrability and extension, what excellencies, what perfections is it capable of?<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-197" id="note-197" epub:type="noteref">197</a></p>
			<p>As infinite space cannot be God, though He be excluded from no place or space; so, though He is eternal, yet eternity or infinite duration itself is not God.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-198" id="note-198" epub:type="noteref">198</a> For duration, abstracted from all durables, is nothing actually existing by itself: it is the duration of a being, not a being.</p>
			<p>Infinite space and duration, taken together, cannot be God: because an interminable space of infinite duration is still nothing but eternal space, and that is at most but an eternal vacuum.</p>
			<p>Since it has been already proved that corporeity is inconsistent with Divine perfection, though matter should be infinitely extended or there should be an infinite quantity of it, yet still, wherever it is, it carries this inconsistence along with it.</p>
			<p>If to matter be added infinite duration, neither does this alter the nature of it. This only supposes it to be eternally what it is, <abbr class="initialism">i.e.</abbr> eternally incapable of Divine perfection.</p>
			<p>And if to it you add the ideas of both infinite extension (or space) and duration too, yet still, so long as matter is matter, it must always and everywhere be incapable of Divinity.</p>
			<p>Lastly, not the universe, or sum total of finite beings, can be God. For if it is, then everything is divine, everything God, or of God; and so all things together must make but one being.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-199" id="note-199" epub:type="noteref">199</a> But the contrary to this we see: there being evidently many beings distinct, and separable one from another, and independent each of other. Nay, this distinction and separation of existence, besides what we see without us, we may even feel within ourselves. We are severally conscious to ourselves of the individuation and distinction of our own minds from all other: nor is there anything of which we can be more certain. Were we all the same being, and had one mind, as in that case we must have, thoughts could not be private, or the peculiar thoughts of any one person, but they must be common acts of the whole mind, and there could be but one conscience common to us all.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-200" id="note-200" epub:type="noteref">200</a> Besides, if all things conjunctly are God or the Perfect being (I dread the mention of such things, though it be in order to refute them), how comes this remarkable instance of imperfection, among many others, to cleave to us: that we should not know even ourselves, and what we are?<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-201" id="note-201" epub:type="noteref">201</a> In short, no collection of beings can be one being; and therefore not God. And the universe itself is but a collection of distinct beings.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-202" id="note-202" epub:type="noteref">202</a></p>
			<p><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span>. It is so far from being true that God is corporeal, that there could be no such thing as either matter or motion, if there was not some Superior being upon whom they depended.</b> Or, <b>God is such a being, that without Him there could be neither matter nor motion.</b> This must be true of matter, because it has been proved already that there can be but one independent being, that he is incorporeal, and that the existence of all other beings must depend upon Him. But the same thing may be proved otherwise: If matter (I mean the existence of it) does not depend upon something above it, it must be an independent being; and if an independent being, a necessary being; and then there could be no such thing as a vacuum, but all bodies must be perfectly solid; and, more than that, the whole world could be but one such body, five times as firm as brass, and incapable of all motion. For that being which exists necessarily does necessarily exist: that is, it cannot <em>not</em> exist. But in a vacuum matter does not exist.</p>
			<p>Moreover, if matter be an independent, necessary being, and exists of itself, this must be true of every particle of it; and if so, there could not only be no vacuum, but every particle must be everywhere. For it could not be limited to occupy only a place of such certain dimensions by its own nature, since this confinement of existence within certain bounds implies nonexistence in other places, beyond those bounds, and is equal to a negation of existence; and when existence is essential to any being, a negation of existence cannot be so. Nor, in the next place, could its existence be limited by anything else, because it is supposed to have its existence only of itself: <abbr class="initialism">i.e.</abbr> to have a principle of existence in itself, or to have an existence that is not dependent upon or obnoxious to any other.</p>
			<p>And, I may add still, if matter be self-existent, I do not see, not only how it comes to be restrained to a place of some certain capacity, but also how it comes to be limited in other respects, or why it should not exist in a manner that is in all respects perfect. So that thus it appears, matter must derive its existence from some other being, who causes it to be just what it is. And the being who can do this must be God.</p>
			<p>It is to no purpose to object here that one cannot conceive how the existence of matter can be derived from another being. For God, being above our conceptions, the manner in which He operates, and in which things depend upon him, must also be inconceivable. Reason discovers that this visible world must owe its existence to some invisible Almighty being: <abbr class="initialism">i.e.</abbr> it discovers this to be fact, and we must not deny facts because we know not <em>how</em> they are effected. It is far from being new, that our faculties should disclose to us the existence of things, and then drop us in our inquiry <em>how</em> they are. Thus much for matter.</p>
			<p id="p-41">As for <em>motion</em>: without a First cause, such as has been described, there could be none; and much less such motions as we see in the world. This may be immediately deduced from the foregoing paragraphs. For if matter itself could not be without such a cause, it is certain motion, which is an affection of matter, could never be.</p>
			<p>But further, there could be no motion, unless either there be in matter itself a power of beginning it; or it is communicated from body to body in an infinite succession, or in a circle, and so has no beginning; or else is produced by some incorporeal being, or beings. Now as hardy as men are in advancing opinions that favor their vices, though never so repugnant to reason, I can hardly believe anyone will assert that a parcel of mere matter (let it be great or small, of any figure whatsoever, <abbr>etc.</abbr>) left altogether to itself, could ever of itself begin to move. If there is any such bold assertor, let him fix his eyes upon some lump of matter, <abbr class="initialism">e.g.</abbr> a stone, piece of timber, or a clod (cleared of all animals), and peruse it well; and then, ask himself seriously whether it is possible for him in earnest to believe that that stone, log, or clod, though nothing corporeal or incorporeal should excite or meddle with it, might some time or other of itself begin to creep. However, to be short, a power of beginning motion is not in the idea of matter. It is passive, as we see, to the impressions of motion, and susceptive of it, but cannot produce it. On the contrary, it will always persist uniformly in its present state, either of rest or motion, if nothing stirs, diverts, accelerates, or stops it. Nor is there anything in all physics better settled than that which is called <i xml:lang="la">vis inertiæ</i> or the inertia of matter.</p>
			<p>The propagation of motion from body to body, without any First mover, or immaterial cause of motion, has been proved impossible, <a href="#p-2">proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></a>.</p>
			<p>The supposition of a perpetual motion in a circle is begging the question. For if A moves B, B moves C, and so on to Z, and then Z moves A; this is the same as to say that A moves A, by the intervention of B, C, D, … Z: that is, A moves itself, or can begin motion.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-203" id="note-203" epub:type="noteref">203</a></p>
			<p>It remains then, that all corporeal motions come originally from some mover incorporeal, which must be either that Supreme and self-existing spirit himself, who is God, or such as will put us into the way how to find that there is such a Being (<a href="#p-2">turn back to proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></a>).</p>
			<p>If we consider ourselves, and the voluntary motions begun by us, we may there see the thing exemplified. We move our bodies, or some members of them, and by these move other things, as they again do others, and know these motions to spring from the operations of our minds; but then we know also, that we have not an independent power of creating motion. If we had, it could not be so limited as our locomotive faculties are, nor confined to small quantities and certain circumstances only: we should have had it from eternity, nor could we ever be deprived of it. So that we are necessitated to look up and acknowledge some Higher being, who is able not only to produce motion, but to impart a faculty of producing it.</p>
			<p>And if the petty motions of us mortals afford arguments for the being of a God, much more may those greater motions we see in the world, and the phenomena attending them: I mean the motions of the planets and heavenly bodies. For these must be put into motion, either by one common mighty Mover, acting upon them immediately, or by causes and laws of His appointment, or by their respective movers, who, for reasons to which you can by this time be no stranger, must depend upon some Superior, that furnish them with the power of doing this. And granting it to be done either of these ways, we can be at no great distance from a demonstration of the existence of a Deity.</p>
			<p>It may perhaps be said that though matter has not the power of moving itself, yet it has an attractive force by which it can move other parts of matter, so that all matter equally moves and is moved. But, allowing those things which are now usually ascribed to attraction, we shall still be necessitated to own some Superior being whose influence mixes itself with matter, and operates upon it, or at least who, some way or other, imparts this force. For attraction, according to the true sense of the word, supposes one body to act upon another at a distance, or where it is not; but nothing can be an agent, where it is not at all. Matter can act only by contact, impelling contiguous bodies, when it is put into motion by something else, or resisting those which strike against it, when it is at rest. And this it does as matter: <abbr class="initialism">i.e.</abbr> by being impenetrable to other matter; but attraction is not of the nature or idea of matter. So that what is called “attraction,” is so called only because the same things happen as if the parts of matter did mutually attract; but in truth this can only be an effect of something which acts upon or by matter according to a certain law. The parts of matter seem not only to gravitate towards each other, but many of them to fly each other. Now these two contrary motions and seeming qualities cannot both proceed from matter <i xml:lang="la">quà</i> matter; cannot both be of the nature of it: and therefore they must be owing to some external cause, or to some other being, which excites in them this as it were love and discord.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-204" id="note-204" epub:type="noteref">204</a></p>
			<p>Besides, as to the revolution of a planet about the sun, mere gravitation is not sufficient to produce that effect. It must be compounded with a motion of projection, to keep the planet from falling directly into the sun, and bring it about; and from what hand, I desire to know, comes this other motion (or direction)? Who impressed it?</p>
			<p>What a vast field for contemplation is here opened! Such regions of matter about us, in which there is not the least particle that does not carry with it an argument of God’s existence; not the least stick or straw, or other trifle that falls to the ground, but shows it; not the slightest motion produced, the least whisper of the air, but tells it.</p>
			<p><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>. The frame and constitution of the world, the magnificence of it, the various phenomena and kinds of beings, the uniformity observed in the productions of things, the uses and ends for which they serve, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, do all show that there is some Almighty designer, an infinite wisdom and power at the top of all these things: such marks there are of both.</b><a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-205" id="note-205" epub:type="noteref">205</a> or, <b>God is that Being, without whom such a frame or constitution of the world, such a magnificence in it, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, could not be.</b> In order to prove to anyone the grandness of this fabric of the world, one needs only to bid him consider the sun, with that insupportable glory and lustre that surrounds it; to demonstrate the vast distance, magnitude, and heat of it; to represent to him the chorus of planets moving periodically, by uniform laws, in their several orbits about it, affording a regular variety of aspects, guarded some of them by secondary planets, and, as it were, emulating the state of the sun, and probably all possessed by proper inhabitants; to remind him of those surprising visits the comets make us, the large trains, or uncommon splendor, which attends them, the far country they come from, and the curiosity and horror they excite not only among us, but in the inhabitants of other planets, who also may be up to see the entry and progress of these ministers of fate;<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-206" id="note-206" epub:type="noteref">206</a> to direct his eye and contemplation through those azure fields and vast regions above him, up to the fixed stars, that radiant numberless host of heaven, and to make him understand how unlikely a thing it is that they should be placed there only to adorn and bespangle a canopy over our heads (though that would be a great piece of magnificence too), and much less to supply the places of so many glowworms, by affording a feeble light to our earth, or even to all our fellow-planets; to convince him, that they are rather so many other suns, with their several regions and sets of planets about them; to show him, by the help of glasses, still more and more of these fixed lights, and to beget in him an apprehension of their unaccountable numbers, and of those immense spaces that lie retired beyond our utmost reach and even imagination⁠—I say, one needs but to do this, and explain to him such things as are now known almost to everybody, and by it to show that if the world be not infinite, it is <i xml:lang="la">infinito similis</i>,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-207" id="note-207" epub:type="noteref">207</a> and therefore sure a magnificent structure, and the work of an infinite Architect. But if we could take a view of all the particulars contained within that astonishing compass, which we have thus hastily run over, how would wonders multiply upon us? Every corner, every part of the world is as it were made up of other worlds. If we look upon this, our seat (I mean this earth), what scope is here for admiration? The great variety of mountains, hills, valleys, plains, rivers, seas, trees, plants! The many tribes of different animals with which it is flocked! The multifarious inventions and works of one of these; that is, of us men, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> And yet when all these (heaven and earth) are surveyed as nicely as they can be by the help of our unassisted senses, and even of telescopical glasses, by the assistance of good microscopes in very small parts of matter as many new wonders<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-208" id="note-208" epub:type="noteref">208</a> may perhaps be discovered, as those already observed: new kingdoms of animals, new architecture and curiosity of work. So that, as before our senses and even conception fainted in those vast journeys we were obliged to take in considering the expanse of the universe, so here again they fail us in our researches into the principles and consistuent parts of it. Both the beginnings and the ends of things, the least and the greatest, all conspire to baffle us, and, which way ever we prosecute our inquiries, we still fall in with fresh subjects of amazement, and fresh reasons to believe that there are indefinitely still more, and more behind, that will forever escape our eagerest pursuits and deepest penetration.</p>
			<p>This mighty building is not only thus grand, and the appearances stupendous in it, but the <em>manner</em> in which things are effected is commonly unintelligible, and their causes too profound for us. There are indeed many things in nature which we know, and some of which we seem to know the causes, but, alas! how few are these with respect to the whole sum? And the causes which we assign, what are they? Commonly such, as can only be expressed in general terms, while the bottoms of things remain unfathomable. Such as have been collected from experience, but could scarcely be known beforehand, by any arguments <i xml:lang="la">à priori</i>, to be capable of rendering such effects; and yet till causes are known after that manner, they are not thoroughly understood. Such, as seem disproportionate and too little, and are so insufficient and unsatisfactory, that one cannot but be inclined to think that something immaterial and invisible must be immediately concerned. In short, we know many times that such a thing will have such an effect, or perhaps that such an effect is produced by such a cause, but the manner <em>how</em> we know not, or but grossly, and if such an hypothesis be true. It is impossible for us to come at the true principles of things, or to see into the economy of the finest part of nature and workings of the first springs. The causes that appear to us, are but effects of other causes; the vessels of which the bodies of plants and animals consist, are made up of other, smaller vessels; the subtlest parts of matter which we have any notion of (as animal spirits, or particles of light), have <em>their</em> parts, and may for ought we know be compound bodies; and, as to the substances themselves of all these things, and their internal constitution, they are hid from our eyes. Our philosophy dwells in the surface of nature.</p>
			<p>However, in the next place, we ourselves cannot but be witnesses that there are stated methods, as so many set forms of proceeding, which things punctually and religiously keep to. The same causes, circumstanced in the same manner, have always the same success; all the species of animals among us, are made according to one general idea; and so are those of plants also, and even minerals: no new ones are brought forth or arisen anywhere, and the old are preserved and continued by the old ways.</p>
			<p>Lastly, it appears, I think plainly enough, in the parts and model of the world, that there is a <em>contrivance</em> and a respect to certain reasons and <em>ends</em>. How the sun is posited near the middle of our system for the more convenient dispensing of his benign influences to the planets moving about him; how the plain of the earth’s equator intersects that of her orbit, and makes a proper angle with it, in order to diversify the year and create a useful variety of seasons, and many other things of this kind, though a thousand times repeated, will always be pleasing meditations to good men and true scholars. Who can observe the vapors to ascend, especially from the sea, meet above in clouds, and fall again after condensation, and not understand this to be a kind of distillation in order to clear the water of its grosser salts, and then by rains and dews to supply the fountains and rivers with fresh and wholesome liquor, to nourish the vegetables below by showers which descend in drops as from a watering-pot upon a garden, <abbr>etc.</abbr>; who can view the structure of a plant or animal, the indefinite number of their fibers and fine vessels, the formation of larger vessels and the several members out of them, and the apt disposition of all these, the way laid out for the reception and distribution of nutriment, the effect this nutriment has in extending the vessels, bringing the vegetable or animal to its full growth and expansion, continuing the motion of the several fluids, repairing the decays of the body, and preserving life; who can take notice of the several faculties of animals, their arts of saving and providing for themselves, or the ways in which they are provided for, the uses of plants to animals, and of some animals to others, particularly to mankind, the care taken that the several species should be propagated out of their proper seeds (without confusion),<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-209" id="note-209" epub:type="noteref">209</a> the strong inclinations implanted in animals for that purpose, their love of their young, and the like; I say, who can do this, and not see a <em>design</em>, in such regular pieces, so nicely wrought, and so preserved? If there was but <em>one</em> animal, and in that case it could not be doubted but that his eyes were made that he might see with them, his ears that he might hear with them, and so on, through at least the most considerable parts of him; if it can much less be doubted, when the same things are repeated in the individuals of all the tribes of animals; if the like observations may be made with respect to vegetables, and other things; and if all these kinds of things, and therefore much more their particulars, upon and in the earth, waters, air, are inconceivably numerous (as most evidently they are), one cannot but be convinced from that, which is so very obvious to every understanding, and plainly runs through the nobler parts of the visible world, that not only they, but other things, even those that seem to be less noble, have their ends too, though not so well understood.</p>
			<p>And now, since we cannot suppose the parts of matter to have contrived this wonderful form of a world among themselves, and then by agreement to have taken their respective posts, and pursued constant ends by certain methods and measures concerted (because these are acts of which they are not capable), there must be some other Being, whose wisdom and power are equal to such a mighty work as is the structure and preservation of the world. There must be some almighty Mind, who models and adorns it, lays the causes of things so deep, prescribes them such uniform and steady laws, destines and adapts them to certain purposes, and makes one thing to fit and answer to another.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-210" id="note-210" epub:type="noteref">210</a></p>
			<p>That such a beautiful scheme, such a just and geometrical arrangement of things, composed of innumerable parts, and placed as the offices and uses and wants of the several beings require, through such an immense extent, should be the effect of <em>chance</em> only, is a conceit so prodigiously absurd that certainly no one can espouse it heartily, who understands the meaning of that word. “Chance” seems to be only a term by which we express our ignorance of the cause of anything. For when we say anything comes “by chance,” we do not mean that it had no other cause, but only that we do not know the true cause which produced it, or interposed in such a manner as to make that fall out which was not expected. Nor can I think that anybody has such an idea of chance, as to make it an <em>agent</em> or really existing and acting cause of anything, and much less sure of <em>all</em> things. Whatever events or effects there are, they must proceed from some agent or cause, which is either free or not free (that is, necessary). If it be free, it wills what it produces, and therefore that which is produced is produced with design, not by chance. If it acts necessarily, the event must necessarily be, and therefore it is not by accident. For that which is by accident or chance only, might not have been; or, it is an accident only that it is. There can be therefore no such cause as chance. And to omit a great deal that might yet be said, matter is indefinitely divisible, and the first particles (or atoms) of which it consists must be small beyond all our apprehension; and the chances that must all hit to produce <em>one</em> individual of any species of material beings (if only chance was concerned), must consequently be indefinitely many; and if space be also indefinitely extended, and the number of those individuals (not to say of the species themselves) which lie dispersed in it indefinite, the chances required to the production of them all, or of the universe, will be the rectangle of one indefinite quantity drawn into another. We may well call them infinite. And then, to say that anything cannot happen unless infinite chances coincide, is the same as to say there are infinite chances against the happening of it, or odds that it will not happen; and this, again, is the same as to say it is impossible to happen, since if there be a possibility that it may happen, the hazard is not infinite. The world therefore cannot be the child of chance.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-211" id="note-211" epub:type="noteref">211</a> He must be little acquainted with the works of nature, who is not sensible how delicate and fine they are; and the finer they are, the grosser were those of Epicurus.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-212" id="note-212" epub:type="noteref">212</a></p>
			<p>If it should be objected that many things seem to be useless, many births are monstrous, or the like, such answers as these may be made: The uses of some things are known to some men, and not to others; the uses of some are known now, that were not known to anybody formerly; the uses of many may be discovered hereafter; and those of some other things may forever remain unknown to all men, and yet be in nature, as much as those discovered were before their discovery, or are now in respect of them who know them not. Things have not, therefore, no uses, because they are concealed from us. Nor is nature irregular, or without method, because there are some seeming deviations from the common rule. These are generally the effects of that influence which free agents and various circumstances have upon natural productions, which may be deformed or hurt by external impressions, heterogeneous matter introduced, or disagreeable and unnatural motions excited; and if the case could be truly put, it would no doubt appear that nature proceeds as regularly (or the laws of nature have as regular an effect), when a monster is produced, as when the usual issue in common cases. Under these circumstances the monster is the <em>genuine</em> issue: that is, in the same circumstances there would always be the same kind of production. And, therefore, if things are now and then misshaped, this infers no unsteadiness or mistake in nature. Besides, the magnificence of the world admits of some <em>perturbations</em>; not to say, requires some <em>variety</em>. The question is: Could all those things, which we <em>do know</em> to have uses and ends, and to the production of which such wonderful contrivance and the combinations of so many things are required, be produced, and method and regularity be preserved <em>so far as it is</em>, if nothing but blind chance presided over all? Are not the innumerable instances of things which are undeniably made with reference to certain ends, and of those which are propagated and repeated by the same constant methods, enough to convince us that there are ends proposed, and rules observed, even where we do not see them? And, lastly, if we should descend to particulars, what are those seemingly useless or monstrous productions in respect of the rest, that plainly declare the ends for which they were intended, and that come into the world by the usual ways, with the usual perfection of their several kinds? If the comparison could be made, I verily believe these would be found to be almost infinituple of the other, which ought therefore to be reputed as nothing.</p>
			<p>They, who content themselves with words, may ascribe the formation of the world to “fate” or “nature,” as well as to chance, or better. And yet fate, in the first place, is nothing but a series of events, considered as necessarily following in some certain order, or of which it has always been true that they <em>would be</em> in their determinate times and places. It is called indeed a series of causes,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-213" id="note-213" epub:type="noteref">213</a> but then they are such causes as are also effects⁠—all of them, if there is no First cause⁠—and may be taken for such. So that in this description is nothing like such a cause as is capable of giving this form to the world. A series of events is the same with events happening <i xml:lang="la">seriatim</i>: which words declare nothing concerning the <em>cause</em> of that concatenation of events, or why it is. Time, place, manner, necessity are but <em>circumstances</em> of things that come to pass, not causes of their existence, or of their being as they are. On the contrary, some external and superior cause must be supposed to put the series in motion, to project the order, to connect the causes and effects, and to <em>impose</em> the necessity.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-214" id="note-214" epub:type="noteref">214</a></p>
			<p>Then for “nature,”</p>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<p>If it be used for the intrinsic manner of existing⁠—that constitution, make, or disposition, with which anything is produced or born, and from which result those properties, powers, inclinations, passions, qualities, and manners, which are called natural (and sometimes “nature”), in opposition to such as are acquired, adventitious, or forced (which use is common)⁠—then to say that nature formed anything, or gave it its manner of existence, is to say that it formed itself, or that the effect is the efficient.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-215" id="note-215" epub:type="noteref">215</a> Besides, how can <em>manner</em> (manner of existing) be the cause of existing, or properly do anything. An agent is an acting being, some substance, not a <em>manner</em> of being.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>If it be used in that other sense, by which it stands for the <em>ideas</em> of things, what they are in themselves, and what in their circumstances, causes, consequences, respects; or, in short, that which determines them to be of this or that kind (as when we say, the <em>nature</em> of justice<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-216" id="note-216" epub:type="noteref">216</a> requires this or that, <abbr class="initialism">i.e.</abbr> the idea of justice requires or supposes it; a crime is of such a <em>nature</em>, that is, bears such a respect to the law, and is attended with such circumstances; or the like): then none of these senses can do an atheist any service.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>If it be used for the <em>world</em><a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-217" id="note-217" epub:type="noteref">217</a> (as, the laws of <em>nature</em> may be understood to be the laws of the world, by which it is governed, and the phenomena in it produced; after the same manner of speaking as when we say, the laws of England, France, <abbr>etc.</abbr>) then it stands for that very thing, the former and architect of which is the object of our inquiry, and therefore cannot be that architect itself. Under this sense may be comprehended that, when it denotes <em>reality of existence</em>, as when it is said that such a thing is not in <em>nature</em> (not to be found in the world).</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>If it signifies the forementioned laws themselves, or that course in which things by virtue of these laws proceed (as when the effects of these laws are styled the works of <em>nature</em>), then, laws suppose some legislator, and are posterior to that of which they are the laws. There can be no laws of any nation, till the people are of which that nation consists.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>If it be used after the same manner as the word “habit” frequently is, to which many things are ascribed (just as they are to nature), though it be nothing existing distinct from the habits which particular men or beings contract, then nature is a kind of abstract notion, which can <em>do</em> nothing. Perhaps “nature” may be put for <em>natures</em>, all natures, after the manner of a collective noun; or it may be mentioned as an <em>agent</em> only as we personify virtues and attributes, either for variety, or the shorter and more convenient expressing of things.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Lastly, if it denotes the Author of nature, or God<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-218" id="note-218" epub:type="noteref">218</a> (the effect seeming, though by a hard metonymy in this case, to be put for the efficient), then, to Him it is that I ascribe the formation of the world, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
			<p>To all which I must subjoin that there is an unaccountable liberty taken in the use of this word, and that frequently it is used merely as a word, and nothing more, they who use it not knowing themselves what they mean by it.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-219" id="note-219" epub:type="noteref">219</a> However, in no sense can it supersede the being of a Deity.</p>
			<p><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>. Life, sense, agitation, and the faculties of our own minds show the existence of some superior Being from whom they are derived,</b> Or, <b>God is that Being, without whom neither could these be, any more than the things before mentioned</b>. That they cannot flow from the nature of any matter about us, as matter, or from any modification, size, or motion of it, if it be not already apparent, may perhaps be proved more fully afterwards. And that our souls themselves are not self-existent, nor hold their faculties independently of all other beings, follows from propositions <a href="#p-11"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span></a> and <a href="#p-15"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span></a>. Therefore, we must necessarily be indebted for what we have, of this kind, to some great Benefactor who is the fountain of them. For, since we are conscious that we have them, and yet have them not of ourselves, we must have them from some other.</p>
			<p>A man has little reason, God knows, to fancy the suppositum of his life, sense, and cogitative faculties to be an independent being, when he considers how transitory and uncertain at best his life and all his enjoyments are: what he is, whence he came, and whither he is going.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-220" id="note-220" epub:type="noteref">220</a> The mind acts not, or in the most imperceptible manner, <i xml:lang="la">in animalculo</i>, or the seminal state of a man; only as a principle of vegetation in the state of an embryon; and as a sensitive soul in the state of infancy, at least for some time, in which we are rather below than above many other animals. By degrees indeed, with age and exercise and proper opportunities, it seems to open itself, find its own talents, and ripen into a rational being. But then it reasons not without labor, and is forced to take many tedious steps in the pursuit of truth; finds all its powers subject to great eclipses and diminutions, in the time of sleep, indisposition, sickness, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and at best reaching but a few objects in respect of all that are in the immensity of the universe; and, lastly, is obnoxious to many painful sensations and reflections. Had the soul of man the principle of its own existence and faculties within itself, clear of all dependence, it could not be liable to all these limitations and defects, to all these alterations and removes from one state to another: it must certainly be constant to itself, and persist in a uniform manner of being.</p>
			<p>There may be, perhaps, who will say, that the soul, together with life, sense, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, are propagated by traduction from parents to children, from them to their children again, and so from eternity,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-221" id="note-221" epub:type="noteref">221</a> and that therefore nothing can be collected from the nature of them as to the existence of a Deity. Answer: if there could be such a traduction, yet to suppose one traduced to come from another traduced, and so <i xml:lang="la">ab æterno</i>, without any further account of the original of mankind, or taking in any author of this traductive power, is the same as to suppose an infinite series of moveds without a mover, or of effects without a cause, the absurdity of which is shown already, <a href="#p-2">proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></a>. But concerning this matter, I cannot but think further, after the following manner: What is meant by <i xml:lang="la">tradux animæ</i> ought to be clearly explained, for it is not easy to conceive how thought, or thinking substances, can be propagated after the manner of branches, or in any manner that can be analogous to it, or even warrant a metaphorical use of that phrase.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-222" id="note-222" epub:type="noteref">222</a> It should also be told whether this traduction be made from one or from both the parents. If from one, from which of them is it? And if from both, then the same <i xml:lang="la">tradux</i>, or branch, must always proceed from two stocks, which is a thing, I presume, that can nowhere else be found, nor has any parallel in nature. And yet such a thing may much better be supposed of vines, or plants, than of thinking beings, who are simple and uncompounded substances.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-223" id="note-223" epub:type="noteref">223</a></p>
			<p>This opinion of the traduction of souls seems to me to stand upon an unsound foundation. For I take it to be grounded chiefly on these two things: the similitude there is between the features, humors, and abilities of children and those of their parents;<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-224" id="note-224" epub:type="noteref">224</a> and the difficulty men find in forming the notion of a spirit.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-225" id="note-225" epub:type="noteref">225</a> For, from hence, they are apt to conclude that there can be no other substance but matter, and that the soul, resulting from some disposition of the body, or some part of it, or being some merely material appendix to it, must <em>attend</em> it, and come along with it from the parent or parents; and as there is a derivation of the one, so there must be also of the other at the same time.</p>
			<p>Now the former of these is not always true, as it ought to be to make the argument valid. Nothing more common than to see children differ from their parents, in their understandings, inclinations, shapes, complexions, and (I am sure) one from another. And this dissimilitude has as much force to prove there is <em>not</em> a traduction, as similitude, whenever that happens, can have to prove there is. Besides, it seems to me not hard to account for <em>some</em> likeness without the help of traduction. It is visible the meat and drink men take, the air they breathe, the objects they see, the sounds they hear, the company they keep, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, will create changes in them, sometimes with respect to their intellectuals, sometimes to their passions and humors, and sometimes to their health and other circumstances of their bodies: and yet the original stamina and fundamental parts of the man remain still the same. If then the <i xml:lang="la">semina</i>, out of which animals are produced, are (as I doubt not) <i xml:lang="la">animalcula</i> already formed,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-226" id="note-226" epub:type="noteref">226</a> which, being distributed about, especially in some opportune places, are taken in with aliment, or perhaps the very air, being separated in the bodies of the males by strainers proper to every kind, and then lodged in their seminal vessels, do there receive some kind of addition and influence, and being thence transferred into the wombs of the females, are there nourished more plentifully, and grow, till they become too big to be longer confined;<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-227" id="note-227" epub:type="noteref">227</a> I say, if this be the case, why may not the nutriment received from the parents, being prepared by their vessels, and of the same kind with that with which they themselves are nourished, be the same in great measure to the <i xml:lang="la">animalcula</i> and <i xml:lang="la">embrya</i> that it is to them, and consequently very much assimilate their young, without the derivation of anything else from them? Many impressions may be made upon the <i xml:lang="la">fœtus</i>, and many tinctures given to the fluids communicated to it from the parents, and yet it, the <em>animal itself</em>, may not be originally begun in them, or traduced from them. This hypothesis (which has long been mine) suggests a reason why the child is sometimes more like the father, sometimes the mother: <abbr>viz.</abbr> because the vessels of the animalculum are disposed to receive a greater proportion of aliment sometimes from the one, sometimes from the other; or the fluids and spirits in one may ferment and operate more strongly than in the other, and so have a greater and more signal effect. (Here, it ought to be observed that though what the animalculum receives from the father is in quantity little, in respect of all that nutriment which it receives by the mother, yet the former, being the first accretion to the original stamina, adhering immediately, and being early interwoven with them, may affect it more.)</p>
			<p>Since there cannot be a proper traduction of the child (one mind and one body) from both the <em>two</em> parents, all the similitude it bears to one of them must proceed from some such cause as I have assigned, or at least not from traduction. For the child being sometimes like the father, and sometimes the mother, and the traduction either always from the father, or always from the mother, there must sometimes be similitude where there is no traduction; and then, if the child may resemble one of them without it, why not the other too? The account I have given appears, many times at least, to be true in plants, which, raised from the same seed, but in different beds and soil, will differ. The different nutriment introduces some diversity into the seed or original plant, and assimilates it in some measure to the rest raised in the same place.</p>
			<p>The other thing which I take to be one of the principal supports to this doctrine of traduction (a supposition that the soul is merely material, or but the result of some disposition in matter) has been undertaken to be refuted hereafter. But I may premise this here: though we can have no <em>image</em> of a spirit (because no being can be portrayed, or represented by an image, but what is material), yet we may have reason to assert the existence of such a substance.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-228" id="note-228" epub:type="noteref">228</a> Matter is a thing which we converse with, of which we know pretty well the nature and properties, and since we cannot find among them any that are cogitative, or such a thing as life, but several things <em>inconsistent</em> with them, we are under a necessity of confessing that there is some other species of substance beside that which is corporeal, and that our souls are of that kind (or rather of one of those kinds which are not merely corporeal, for there must be more than one), though we can draw no image of it in our own minds. Nor is it at all surprising that we should not be able to do this, for how can the mind be the object of itself?<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-229" id="note-229" epub:type="noteref">229</a> It may contemplate the body which it inhabits, may be conscious of its own acts, and reflect upon the ideas it finds⁠—but of its own substance it can have no adequate notion, unless it could be as it were object and spectator both. Only that perfect Being, whose knowledge is infinite, can thus intimately know himself.</p>
			<p>They, who found the traduction of the soul upon this presumption, that it is material, and attends the body as some part or affection of it, seem further to be most woefully mistaken upon this account: because the body <em>itself</em> is not propagated by traduction. It passes indeed <em>through</em> the bodies of the parents, who afford a transitory habitation and subsistence to it; but it cannot be <em>formed by</em> the parents, or <em>grow out</em> of any part of them. For all the vital and essential parts of it must be one coeval system, and formed <em>at once</em> in the first article of the nascent animalculum; since no one of these could be nourished, or ever come to anything, without the rest: on the contrary, if any one of them could prevent and be before the rest, it would soon wither and decay again for lack of nourishment received by proper vessels, as we see the limbs and organs of animals do when the supply due from the animal economy is any way intercepted or obstructed. And since an organized body, which requires to be thus simultaneously made (fashioned, as it were, at one stroke) cannot be the effect of any natural and gradual process, I cannot but conclude that there were animalcula of every tribe originally formed by the almighty Parent, to be the seed of all future generations of animals. Any other manner of production would be like that which is usually called equivocal or spontaneous generation, and with great reason now generally exploded. And it is certain that the analogy of nature in other instances, and microscopical observations, do abet what I have said strongly.</p>
			<p>Lastly, if there is no race of men that has been from eternity, there is no man who is not descended from two first parents: and then the souls of those two first parents could be traduced from no other. And that there is no such race (none that has been upon this earth from eternity), is apparent from the face of earthly things, and the history of mankind,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-230" id="note-230" epub:type="noteref">230</a> arts, and sciences. What is objected against this argument from fancied inundations, conflagrations, <abbr>etc.</abbr><a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-231" id="note-231" epub:type="noteref">231</a> has no weight with me. Let us suppose some such great calamity to happen now. It must be either universal, or not. If universal, so that nobody at all could be saved, then either there must never be any more men, or they must begin again in some first parents. If it was only topical, affecting some one tract of the globe, or if the tops of mountains more eminent, or rocks more firm, remained unaffected, or if there were any natural means left by which men might escape, considerable numbers must certainly survive; and then it cannot be imagined that they should all be absolutely so ignorant of everything, that no one should be able to give an account of such things as were common; no one able to write, or read, or even to recollect that there were such things as letters; none that understood any trade; none that could tell what kind of habitations they had, how they used to be clothed, how their meat dressed, or even what their food was; nor can it be thought that all books, arms, manufactures of every kind, ships, buildings, and all the product of human skill and industry now extant in the world should be so universally and utterly abolished, that no part, no vestigium of them, should remain; not so much as to give a hint toward the speedy restoration of necessary arts at least. The people escaping must sure have clothes on, and many necessaries about them, without which they could not escape, nor outlive such a dreadful scene. In short, no conflagration, no flood, no destruction, can serve the objector’s purpose to reduce mankind to that state which, by ancient memoirs and many undeniable symptoms, we find them to have been in not many thousands of years since; I say, no destruction can serve his purpose, but such an one as makes thorough work, only sparing two or three couples, stripped of everything, and the most stupid and veriest blocks<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-232" id="note-232" epub:type="noteref">232</a> to be picked out of the whole number: natural fools, or mere <i xml:lang="la">homines sylvestres</i>, would retain habits, and fall to their old way of living, as soon as they had the opportunity to do it. And suppose they never should have such an opportunity; yet neither would this serve him effectually, since without some supernatural Power interposing, such a revolution could not be brought about, nor the naked creatures preserved, nor the earth reformed out of its ashes and ruins after such a calcination, or dissolution, such a total demolition of everything. To this give me leave to add, that though many inundations, great earthquakes, volcanos, and fiery eruptions have been in particular countries, yet there is no memory or testimony of any such thing that has ever been universal,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-233" id="note-233" epub:type="noteref">233</a> except perhaps of one deluge: and as to that, if the genius of the language in which the relation is delivered, and the manner of writing history in it were well understood, some labored and moliminous attempts to account for it might have been prevented. And beside that, the same record which tells the thing was, tells also how immediately God was concerned in it, that some persons actually were saved, and that the people who then perished, as well as they who survived, all descended from two first parents: and if that authority be a sufficient proof of one part of the relation, it must be so of the rest.</p>
			<p>We may conclude, then, that the human soul, with its faculties of cogitation, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, depends upon a Superior being. And who can this be but the Supreme being, or God? Of whom I now proceed to affirm, in the next place, that,</p>
			<p>
				<b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>. Though His essence and manner of being is to us altogether incomprehensible, yet we may say with assurance, that He is free from all defects: or One, from whom all defects must be removed.</b>
			</p>
			<p>This proposition has in effect been proved already.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-234" id="note-234" epub:type="noteref">234</a> However I will take the liberty to enlarge a little further upon it here. As our minds are finite, they cannot, without a contradiction, comprehend what is infinite. And if they were enlarged, to ever so great a capacity, yet so long as they retain their general nature, and continue to be of the same kind, they would, by that, be only rendered able to apprehend more and more <em>finite</em> ideas; out of which, howsoever increased or exalted, no positive idea of the perfection of God can ever be formed. For a Perfect being must be infinite, and perfectly One; and in such a nature there can be nothing finite, nor any composition of finites.</p>
			<p>How should we comprehend the nature of the Supreme incorporeal being, or how He exists, when we comprehend not the nature of the most inferior spirits, nor have any conception even of matter itself, divested of its accidents? How should we attain to an adequate knowledge of the Supreme author of the world, when we are utterly incapable of knowing the extent of the world itself, and the numberless undescried regions, with their several states and circumstances, contained in it, never to be frequented or visited by our philosophy; nor can turn ourselves any way, but we are still accosted with something above our understanding? If we cannot penetrate so far into effects, as to discover them and their nature thoroughly, it is not to be expected that we should⁠—that we can ever be admitted to⁠—see through the mysteries of His nature, who is the Cause, so far above them all. The Divine perfection, then, and manner of being, must be of a kind different from and above all that we can conceive.</p>
			<p>However, notwithstanding our own defects, we may positively affirm there can be <em>none</em> in God: since He is perfect, as we have seen, He cannot be defective or imperfect. This needs no further proof. But what follows from it, I would have to be well understood and remembered: <abbr>viz.</abbr> that from Him must be removed want of life and activity, ignorance, impotence, acting inconsistently with reason and truth, and the like. Because these are defects: defect of knowledge, power, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> These are defects and blemishes, even in us. And though his perfection is above all our ideas, and of a different kind from the perfections of men or any finite beings, yet what would be a defect in them, would be much more such in Him, and can by no means be ascribed to Him.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-235" id="note-235" epub:type="noteref">235</a></p>
			<p>Though we understand not His manner of knowing things, yet, ignorance being uniform and the same in every subject, we understand what is meant by that word, and can literally and truly deny that to belong to Him. The like may be said with respect to His power, or manner of operating, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> And when we speak of the internal essential attributes of God positively, as that He is omniscient, omnipotent, eternal, <abbr>etc.</abbr> the intent is only to say, that there is no object of knowledge, or power, which He does not know, or cannot do; He exists without beginning and end; <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and thus we keep still within the limits allowed by the proposition.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-236" id="note-236" epub:type="noteref">236</a> That is, we may speak thus without pretending to comprehend His nature. And so,</p>
			<p><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span>. We may consider God as operating in the production and government of the world, and may draw conclusions from His works, as they are called, notwithstanding anything which has been said.</b><a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-237" id="note-237" epub:type="noteref">237</a> Because, this we can do without comprehending the manner of His existence. Nay, the contemplation of His works leads us into a necessity of owning that there must be an incomprehensible Being at the head of them.</p>
			<p>Though I do not comprehend the mode in which the world depends upon Him and He influences and disposes things, because this enters into His nature, and the one cannot be understood without the other; yet if I see things which I know cannot be self-existent, and observe plainly an economy and design in the disposition of them, I may conclude that there is some Being, upon whom their existence does depend, and by whom they are modeled; may call this Being “God,” or the Author and Governor of the world, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, without contradicting myself or truth⁠—as I hope it will appear from what has been said, and is going to be said in the next proposition.</p>
			<p id="p-78"><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span>. God, who gives existence to the world, does also govern it by His providence.</b> Concerning this grand question, “Whether there is a Divine providence, or not,” I use to think, for myself, after the following manner.</p>
			<p>First: The world may be said to be <em>governed</em> (at least cannot be said to be <i xml:lang="grc">ἀκυβέρνητος</i> [ungoverned], or left to fluctuate fortuitously), if there are laws by which natural causes act, the several phenomena in it succeed regularly, and, in general, the constitution of things is preserved⁠—if there are rules observed in the production of herbs, trees, and the like⁠—if the several kinds of animals are, in proportion to their several degrees and stations in the animal kingdom, furnished with faculties proper to direct and determine their actions (and when they act according to them, they may be said to follow the <em>law</em> of their nature)⁠—if they are placed and provided for suitably to their respective natures and wants,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-238" id="note-238" epub:type="noteref">238</a> or (which amounts to the same thing) if their natures are adapted to their circumstances<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-239" id="note-239" epub:type="noteref">239</a>⁠—if, lastly, particular cases relating to rational beings are taken care of in such a manner as will at last agree best with reason.</p>
			<p>Secondly: If there are such laws and provisions, they can come originally from no other being, but from Him who is the Author of nature. For those laws which result from the natures of things, their properties, and the use of their faculties, and may be said to be written upon the things themselves, can be the laws of no other; nor can those things whose very being depends upon God, exist under any condition repugnant to His will, and therefore can be subject to no laws or dispositions which He would not have them be subject to: that is, which are not <em>His</em>. Besides, there is no other being capable of imposing laws or any scheme of government upon the world, because there is no other who is not himself <em>part</em> of the world, and whose own existence does not depend upon Him.</p>
			<p>Thirdly: By the “providence of God” I mean His governing the world by such laws, and making such provisions, as are mentioned above. So that if there are such, there is a Divine providence.</p>
			<p>Lastly: It is not impossible that there should be such; on the contrary, we have just reasons to believe there are. It would be an absurd assertion to say that anything is impossible to a being whose nature is infinitely above our comprehension, if the terms do not imply a contradiction, but we may with confidence assert that it is impossible for anything, whose existence flows from such a being, ever to grow so far out of His reach, or be so emancipated from under Him, that the manner of its existence should not be regulated and determined by Him.</p>
			<p>As to inanimate substances, we see the case to be really just as it was supposed before to be. The heavenly and greater bodies keep their stations, or persevere to go the same circuits over and over, by a <em>certain law</em>. Little bodies or particles, of the same kind, observe continually the same <em>rules</em> of attracting, repelling, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> When there are any seeming variations in nature, they proceed only from the different circumstances and combinations of things, acting all the while under their ancient <em>laws</em>. We are so far acquainted with the laws of gravitation and motion, that we are able to calculate their effects, and serve ourselves of them, supplying upon many occasions the defect of power in ourselves by mechanical powers, which never fail to answer according to the establishment. Briefly, we see it so far from being <em>impossible</em> that the inanimate world should be governed by laws, that all the parts of it are obnoxious to laws by them <em>inviolable</em>.</p>
			<p>As to vegetables, we see also how they are determined by certain methods prescribed them. Each sort is produced from its proper seed, has the same texture of fibers, is nourished by the same kind of juices out of the earth, digested and prepared by the same kind of vessels, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Trees receive annually their peculiar liveries, and bear their proper fruits; flowers are dressed, each family, in the same colors, or diversify their fashions after a certain manner proper to the kind, and breathe the same essences; and both these and all other kinds observe their seasons, and seem to have their several professions and trades appointed them, by which they produce such food and manufactures (pardon the catachresis), as may satisfy the wants of animals. Being so very necessary, they, or at least the most useful, grow easily: being fixed in the earth, insensible, and not made for society, they are generally <i xml:lang="grc">ἀῤῥενοθήλεα</i> [hermaphroditic]; being liable to a great consumption both of them and their seeds, they yield great quantities of these, in order to repair and multiply their race, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> So that here is evidently a <em>regulation</em>, by which the several orders are preserved, and the ends of them answered according to their first establishment too.</p>
			<p>Then as to animals, there are laws which <i xml:lang="la">mutatus mutandis</i> are common to them with inanimate beings and vegetables, or at least such as resemble<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-240" id="note-240" epub:type="noteref">240</a> their laws. The individuals of the several kinds of those, as of these, have the same (general) shape and members, to be managed after the same manner⁠—have the same vessels replenished with the same kinds of fluids, and furnished with the same glands for the separation and distribution of such parts of them as answer the same intentions in them all⁠—are stimulated by the same appetites and uneasinesses to take in their food, continue their breed, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> And whatever it is, that proceeds thus in a manner so like to that of vegetables, according to fixed methods, and keeps in the same general track as they do, may be said to observe and be under some like rule or law, which either operates upon and limits it <i xml:lang="la">ab extra</i>, or was given it with its nature. But there are, moreover, certain obligations resulting from the several degrees of reason and sense, or sense only, of which we cannot but be conscious in ourselves, and observe some faint indications in the kinds below us, and which can be looked upon as nothing less than <em>laws</em> by which animals are to move and manage themselves: that is, otherwise expressed, by which the Author of their natures <em>governs</em> them. ’Tis true these laws may not impose an absolute necessity, nor be of the same rigor with those of inanimate and merely passive beings, because the beings which are subject to these (men at least) may be supposed in some measure free, and to act upon some kind of principles or motives: yet still, they may have the nature of laws, though they may be broken; and may make a part of that providence by which God administers the affairs of the world. Whatever advantages I obtain by my own free endeavors, and right use of those faculties and powers I have, I look upon them to be as much the effects of God’s providence and government as if they were given me immediately by Him, without my acting, since all my faculties and abilities (whatever they are) depend upon Him, and are as it were instruments of His providence to me in respect of such things as may be procured by them.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-241" id="note-241" epub:type="noteref">241</a></p>
			<p>To finish this head: it is so far from being <em>impossible</em> that the several tribes of animals should be so made and placed as to find proper ways of supporting and defending themselves (I mean, so far as it is consistent with the general economy of the world, for some cannot well subsist without the destruction of some others), that, on the contrary, we see men, beasts, birds, fishes, insects all have organs and faculties adapted to their respective circumstances and opportunities of finding their proper food or prey, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, even to the astonishment of them who attend to the history of nature. If <em>men</em>, who seem to have more wants than any other kind, meet with difficulties in maintaining life, it is because they themselves, not contented with what is decent and convenient only, have by their luxuries and scandalous neglect of their reason <em>made</em> life expensive.</p>
			<p>The world, then, being not left in a state of confusion or as a chaos, but reduced into order and methodized for ages to come⁠—the several species of beings having their offices and provinces assigned them, plants and animals subsistence set out for them, and, as they go off, successors appointed to relieve them, and carry on the scheme, <abbr>etc.</abbr>⁠—that the <em>possibility</em> only of a <em>general</em> providence should be allowed, is certainly too modest a demand. We see, or may see, that in fact there is such a providence.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-242" id="note-242" epub:type="noteref">242</a></p>
			<p>The great difficulty is, how to account for that providence which is called “particular,” or that which respects (principally) particular men. For rational beings and free agents are capable of doing and deserving well or ill. Some will make a right use of their faculties and opportunities, some will not; the vicious may or may not repent, or repent and relapse; some fall into evil habits through inadvertence, bad examples, and the like, rather than any design, and these want to be reclaimed; some may be supposed to worship God and to crave His protection and blessing, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and then a proper answer to their prayers may be humbly expected. Hence many and great differences will arise, which will require from a governor suitable encouragements, rewards, correptions, punishments, and that some should be protected and fortunate, others not, or less. Now the good or ill state of a man here, his safety or danger, happiness or unhappiness, depend upon many things, which seem to be scarce all capable of being determined by providence. They depend upon what he does himself, and what naturally follows from his own behavior⁠—upon what is done by others, and may either touch him at the same time, or reach him afterward⁠—upon the course of nature, which must affect him⁠—and, in fine, upon many incidents, of which no account is to be given.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-243" id="note-243" epub:type="noteref">243</a> As to what he does himself, it is impossible for him, as things are in this maze of life, to know always what tends to happiness, and what not; or, if he could know, that, which ought to be done, may not be within the compass of his powers. Then, if the actions of other men are free, how can they be determined to be only such as may be either good or bad (as the case requires) for some other particular man, since such a determination seems inconsistent with liberty? Besides, numbers of men⁠—acting every one upon the foot of their own private freedom, and the several degrees of sense and ability which they respectively have⁠—their acts (as they either conspire, or cross and obliquely impede, or perhaps directly meet and oppose each other, and have different effects upon men of different makes, or in different circumstances) must cause a strange embarras, and entangle the plot.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-244" id="note-244" epub:type="noteref">244</a> And, as to the course of nature, if a <em>good</em> man be passing by an infirm building, just in the article of falling, can it be expected that God should suspend the force of gravitation till he is gone by, in order to his deliverance; or can we think it would be increased, and the fall hastened, if a <em>bad</em> man was there, only that he might be caught, crushed, and made an example?<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-245" id="note-245" epub:type="noteref">245</a> If a man’s safety or prosperity should depend upon winds or rains, must new motions be impressed upon the atmosphere, and new directions given to the floating parts of it, by some extraordinary and new influence from God? Must clouds be so precipitated, or kept in suspense,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-246" id="note-246" epub:type="noteref">246</a> as the case of a particular man or two requires? To which, add that the differing, and many times contrary interests of men are scarce to be reconciled. The wind which carries one into the port, drives another back to sea; and the rains that are but just sufficient upon the hills, may drown the inhabitants of the valleys.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-247" id="note-247" epub:type="noteref">247</a> In short, may we expect miracles,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-248" id="note-248" epub:type="noteref">248</a> or can there be a particular providence, a providence that suits the several cases and prayers of individuals, without a continual repetition of them, and force frequently committed upon the laws of nature and the freedom of intelligent agents? For my part, I verily believe there may. For,</p>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<p>It seems to me not impossible that God should know what is to come; on the contrary, it is highly reasonable to think that He does and must know things future. Whatever happens in the world which does not come immediately from Him, must either be the effect of mechanical causes, or of the motions of living beings and free agents. For chance, we have seen already, is no cause. Now as to the former, it cannot be impossible for Him, upon whom the being and nature of everything depends, and who therefore must intimately know all their powers and what effects they will have, to see through the whole train of causes and effects, and whatever will come to pass in that way<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-249" id="note-249" epub:type="noteref">249</a>⁠—nay, it is is impossible that He should <em>not</em> do it. We ourselves, if we are satisfied of the goodness of the materials of which a machine is made, and understand the force and determination of those powers by which it is moved, can tell what it will do, or what will be the effect of it. And as to those things which depend upon the voluntary motions of free agents, it is well known that men (by whom learn how to judge of the rest) can only be free with respect to such things as are within their sphere⁠—not great, God knows⁠—and their freedom with respect to these can only consist in a liberty either to act, without any incumbent necessity, as their own reason and judgment shall determine them, or to neglect their rational faculties, and not use them at all, but suffer themselves to be carried away by the tendencies and inclinations of the body, which left thus to itself acts in a manner mechanically. Now He, who knows what <em>is</em> in men’s power, what not; knows the make of their bodies, and all the mechanism and propensions of them; knows the nature and extent of their understandings, and what will determine them this or that way; knows all the process of natural (or second) causes, and consequently how these may work upon them:<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-250" id="note-250" epub:type="noteref">250</a> He, I say, who knows all this, may know what men will do, if He can but know this one thing more, <abbr>viz.</abbr> whether they will use their rational faculties or not. And since even we ourselves, mean and defective as we are, can in some measure conceive how so much as this may be done, and seem to want but one step to finish the account, can we with any show of reason deny to a Perfect being this one article more, or think that He cannot do that too, especially if we call to mind that this very power of using our own faculties is held of Him?<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-251" id="note-251" epub:type="noteref">251</a></p>
					<p>Observe what a sagacity there is in some men⁠—not only in respect of physical causes and effects, but also of the future actings of mankind⁠—and how very easy it is, many times (if the persons concerned, their characters, and circumstances are given) to foresee what they will do; as also to foretell many general events, though the intermediate transactions upon which they depend are not known.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-252" id="note-252" epub:type="noteref">252</a> Consider how much more remarkable this penetration is in some men than in others; consider further, that if there be any minds more perfect than the human (and who can be so conceited of himself as to question this?), they must have it in a still more eminent degree, proportionable to the excellence of their natures; in the last place, do but allow (as you must) this power of discerning to be, in God, proportionable to His nature, as in lower beings it is proportionable to theirs, and then it becomes infinite; and then again, the future actions of free agents are at once all unlocked and exposed to His view. For, that knowledge is not infinite which is limited to things past or present or which come to pass necessarily.</p>
					<p>After all, what has been said is only a feeble attempt to show how far even we can go, toward a conception of the manner in which future things may be known; but as we have no adequate idea of an infinite and perfect Being, His powers, and among them His power of knowing, must infinitely pass all our understanding. It must be something different from, and infinitely transcending, all the modes of apprehending things which we know anything of.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-253" id="note-253" epub:type="noteref">253</a></p>
					<p>We know matters of fact by the help of our senses, the strength of memory, impressions made upon fancy, or the report of others (though that indeed is comprehended under <em>senses</em>. For that which we know only by report, in proper speaking we only know the report of, or we have heard it); and all these ways do suppose those matters either to be present, or once to have been. But is it therefore impossible that there should be any <em>other</em> ways of knowing? This is so far from being true, that, since God has no organs of sensation, nor such mean faculties as the best of ours are, and consequently cannot know things in the way which we know them in, if He does not know them by some other way, He cannot know them at all, even though they were present; and therefore there must be other ways, or at least another way, of knowing even matters of fact. And since the difficulty we find, in determining whether future matters of fact may be known, arises chiefly from this: that we in reality consider, without minding it, whether they may be known in <em>our way</em> of knowing; it vanishes, when we recollect that they are and must be known to God by some other way, and not only so, but this must be some way that is perfect and worthy of Him. Future, or what to us is future, may be as truly the object of Divine knowledge, as present is of ours; nor can we<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-254" id="note-254" epub:type="noteref">254</a> tell what respect “past,” “present,” “to come,” have to the Divine mind, or wherein they differ. To deaf men there is no such thing as sound; to blind no such thing as light or color: nor, when these things are defined and explained to them in the best manner which their circumstances admit, are they capable of knowing how they are apprehended. So here, we cannot tell how future things are known, perhaps, any more than deaf or blind people what sounds or colors are and how they are perceived; but yet there may be a way of knowing those, as well as there is of perceiving these. As they want a fifth sense to perceive sounds or colors, of which they have no notion, so perhaps we may want a sixth sense, or some faculty of which future events may be the proper objects. Nor have we any more reason to deny that there is in nature such a sense or faculty, than the deaf or blind have to deny that there is such a sense as that of hearing or seeing.</p>
					<p>We can never conclude that it is impossible for an infinitely perfect Being to know what a free agent will choose to do, till we can comprehend all the powers of such a Being, and that is till we ourselves are infinite and perfect.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-255" id="note-255" epub:type="noteref">255</a> So far are we from being able to pronounce, with any show of reason, that it is impossible there should be such knowledge in God.</p>
					<p>In the last place, this knowledge is not only not impossible, but that which has been already proved concerning the Deity and His perfection does necessarily infer that nothing can be hid from Him. For if ignorance be an imperfection, the ignorance of future acts and events must be so: and then if all imperfections are to be denied of Him, this must.</p>
					<p>There is indeed a common prejudice against the prescience (as it is usually called) of God, which suggests that if God foreknows things, He foreknows them infallibly or certainly, and if so, then they are <em>certain</em>, and if certain, then they are no longer matter of freedom. And thus prescience and freedom are inconsistent. But sure the nature of a thing is not changed by being known, or known beforehand. For if it is known truly, it is known to be what it is, and therefore is not altered by this. The truth is, God foresees, or rather sees the actions of free agents, because they will be⁠—not that they will be because He foresees them.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-256" id="note-256" epub:type="noteref">256</a> If I see an object in a certain place, the veracity of my faculties supposed, it is certain that object is there; but yet, it cannot be said it is there <em>because</em> I see it there, or that my seeing it there is the cause of its being there; but because it is there, therefore I see it there. It is the object that determines my sensation; and so in the other case, it is a future choice of the free agent that determines the prescience, which yet may be infallibly true.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-257" id="note-257" epub:type="noteref">257</a></p>
					<p>Let us put these two contradictory propositions⁠—“B (same particular man) will go to church next Sunday,” and “B will not go to church next Sunday”⁠—and let us suppose withall, that B is free, and that his going or not going depends merely upon his own will. In this case he may indeed do either, but yet he can do but one of these two things: either go, or not go; and one he must do. One of these propositions therefore is now true, but yet it is not the truth of that proposition which forces him to do what is contained in it; on the contrary, the truth of the proposition arises from what he shall choose to do. And if that truth does not force him, the <em>foreknowledge</em> of that truth will not. We may sure suppose B himself to know certainly beforehand which of the two he will choose to do, whether to go to church or not (I mean so far as it depends upon his choice only), and if so, then here is B’s own foreknowledge consistent with his freedom; and if we can but, further, suppose God to know as much in this respect as B does, there will be God’s foreknowledge consistent with B’s freedom.</p>
					<p>In a word, it involves no contradiction to assert that God certainly knows what any man will choose; and therefore, that he should do this cannot be said to be impossible.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>It is not impossible that such laws of nature, and such a series of causes and effects, may be originally designed, that not only general provisions may be made for the several species of beings, but, even particular cases, at least many of them, may also be provided for without innovations or alterations in the course of nature.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-258" id="note-258" epub:type="noteref">258</a> It is true, this amounts to a prodigious scheme, in which all things to come are, as it were, comprehended under one view, estimated, and laid together; but, when I consider what a mass of wonders the universe is in other regards; what a Being God is, incomprehensibly great and perfect; that He cannot be ignorant of anything, no not of the future wants and deportments of particular men; and that all things which derive from Him as the First cause, must do this so as to be consistent one with another, and in such a manner as to make one compact system, befitting so great an Author: I say, when I consider this, I cannot deny such an adjustment of things to be within His power.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-259" id="note-259" epub:type="noteref">259</a> The order of events, proceeding from the settlement of nature, may be as compatible with the due and reasonable success of my endeavors and prayers (as inconsiderable a part of the world as I am),<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-260" id="note-260" epub:type="noteref">260</a> as with any other thing or phenomenon how great soever.</p>
					<p>Perhaps my meaning may be made more intelligible thus: Suppose M (some man) certainly to foreknow, some way or other, that, when he should come to be upon his deathbed, L would petition for some particular legacy in a manner so earnest and humble, and with such a good disposition, as would render it proper to grant his request; and upon this M makes his last will, by which he devises to L that which was to be asked, and then locks up the will⁠—and all this many years before the death of M, and while L had yet no expectation or thought of any such thing. When the time comes, the petition is made and granted⁠—not by making any new will, but by the old one already made, and without alteration; which legacy had, notwithstanding that, never been left had the petition never been preferred. The grant may be called an effect of a future act, and depends as much upon it as if it had been made after the act. So if it had been foreseen that L would not so much as ask, and had therefore been left out of the will, this preterition would have been caused by his carriage, though much later than the date of the will. In all this is nothing hard to be admitted, if M be allowed to foreknow the case.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-261" id="note-261" epub:type="noteref">261</a> And thus the prayers which good men offer to the All-knowing God, and the neglects of others, may find fitting effects already forecasted in the course of nature. Which possibility may be extended to the labors of men, and their behavior in general.</p>
					<p>It is obvious to everyone’s observation, that in fact particular men are very commonly (at least in some measure) rewarded or punished by the general laws and methods of nature. The natural (though not constant) attendents and consequences of virtue are peace, health, and felicity; of vice, loss of philosophical pleasures, a diseased body, debts, and difficulties. Now then, if B be virtuous and happy, C vicious and at last miserable, laboring under a late and fruitless remorse⁠—though this comes to pass through the natural tendence of things, yet these two cases, being supposed such as require, the one that B should be favored, the other that C should suffer for his wickedness, are as effectually <em>provided for</em>, as if God exerted his power in some peculiar way on this occasion.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>It is not impossible that men, whose natures and actions are foreknown, may be introduced into the world in such times, places, and other circumstances, as that their acts and behavior may not only coincide with the general plan of things, but also answer many private cases too.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-262" id="note-262" epub:type="noteref">262</a> The planets and bigger parts of the world, we cannot but see, are disposed into such places and order that they together make a noble <em>system</em>, without having their natural powers of attraction (or the force of that which is equivalent to attraction) or any of the laws of motion restrained or altered. On the contrary, being rightly placed, they, by the observation of these, become subservient to the main design. Now why may there not be in the Divine mind something like a projection of the future history of mankind, as well as of the order and motions and various aspects of the greater bodies of the world? And then why should it not be thought possible for <em>men</em>, as well as for <em>them</em>, by some secret law, though of another kind, or rather by the presidence and guidance of an unseen governing power, to be brought into their places in such a manner as that by the free use of their faculties; the conjunctions and oppositions of their interests and inclinations; the natural influence and weight of their several magnitudes and degrees of parts, power, wealth, <abbr>etc.</abbr>; they may conspire to make out the scheme? And then again, since generals consist of particulars, and in this scheme are comprehended the actions and cases of particular men, they cannot be so situated respectively among the rest of their species as to be serviceable to the principal intention, and fall properly into the general diagram of affairs, unless they and their several actings and cases do in the main correspond one to another, and fit among themselves, or at least are not inconsistent.</p>
					<p>Here is no implication of any contradiction or absurdity in all this: and therefore it may at least be fairly <em>supposed</em>. And if so, it will follow, that a particular providence may be compatible with the natural freedom of men’s actions. Such a supposition is certainly not beyond the power of an almighty, perfect Being; it is moreover worthy of Him, and what they who can dwell a while upon those words, and take their import, must believe.</p>
					<p>The ancients, I am persuaded, had some such thoughts as these. For they were generally fatalists, and yet do not seem to have thought that they were not masters of their own actions.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-263" id="note-263" epub:type="noteref">263</a></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>It is not <em>impossible</em> (for this is all that I contend for here), that many things, suitable to several cases, may be brought to pass by means of secret and sometimes sudden influences on our minds,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-264" id="note-264" epub:type="noteref">264</a> or the minds of other men whose acts may affect us. For instance: if the case should require that N should be delivered from some threatening ruin, or from some misfortune which would certainly befall him if he should go such a way at such a time as he intended, upon this occasion some new reasons may be presented to his mind why he should not go at all, or not then, or not by that road⁠—or he may forget to go. Or, if he is to be delivered from some dangerous enemy, either some new turn given to his thoughts may divert him from going where the enemy will be, or the enemy may be after the same manner diverted from coming where he shall be, or his (the enemy’s) resentment may be qualified, or some proper method of defense may be suggested, or degree of resolution and vigor excited. After the same manner, not only deliverances from dangers and troubles, but advantages and successes may be conferred; or, on the other side, men may, by way of punishment for crimes committed, incur mischiefs and calamities. I say, these things and such like <em>may be</em>. For since the motions and actions of men, which depend upon their wills, do also depend upon their judgments, as these again do upon the present appearances or nonappearances of things in their minds, if a new prospect of things can be any way produced, the lights by which they are seen altered, new forces and directions impressed upon the spirits, passions exalted or abated, the power of judging enlivened or debilitated, or the attention taken off, without any suspension or alteration of the standing laws of nature, than without that <em>new</em> volitions, designs, measures, or a cessation of thinking may also be produced, and thus many things prevented that otherwise would be, and many brought about that would not. But, that this is far from being impossible seems clear to me. For the operations of the mind following in great measure the present disposition of the body, some thoughts and designs, or absences of mind, may proceed from corporeal causes, acting according to the common laws of matter and motion themselves; and so the case may fall in with <abbr>no.</abbr> 2, or they may be occasioned by something said or done by other men; and then the case may be brought under <abbr>no.</abbr> 3, or they may be caused by the suggestion, and impulse, or other silent communications of some spiritual being⁠—perhaps the Deity himself. For that such imperceptible influences and still whispers may be, none of us all can positively deny: that is, we cannot know certainly that there are no such things. On the contrary, I believe there are but few of them who have made observations upon themselves and their affairs, but must, when they reflect on life past and the various adventures and events in it, find many instances in which their usual judgment and sense of things cannot but seem to themselves to have been overruled, they knew not by what, nor how,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-265" id="note-265" epub:type="noteref">265</a> nor why, (<abbr class="initialism">i.e.</abbr> they have done things, which afterwards they wonder how they came to do), and that these actions have had consequences very remarkable in their history.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-266" id="note-266" epub:type="noteref">266</a> I speak not here of men demented with wine, or enchanted with some temptation: the thing holds true of men even in their sober and more considering seasons.</p>
					<p>That there may be possibly such inspirations of new thoughts and counsels may perhaps further appear from this: that we so frequently find thoughts arising in our heads, into which we are led by no discourse, nothing we read, no clue of reasoning, but they surprise and come upon us from we know not what quarter.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-267" id="note-267" epub:type="noteref">267</a> If they proceeded from the mobility of spirits, straggling out of order, and fortuitous affections of the brain, or were of the nature of dreams, why are they not as wild, incoherent, and extravagant as they are? Not to add, that the world has generally acknowledged, and therefore seems to have experienced, some assistance and directions given to good men by the Deity; that men have been many times infatuated, and lost to themselves, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> If anyone should object that if men are thus overruled in their actings, then they are deprived of their liberty, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, the answer is that though man is a free agent, he may not be free as to <em>everything</em>. His freedom may be restrained, and he only accountable for those acts in respect of which he is free.</p>
					<p>If this then be the case, as it seems to be, that men’s minds are susceptive of such insinuations and impressions as frequently, by ways unknown, do affect them and give them an inclination toward this or that, how many things may be brought to pass by these means without fixing and refixing the laws of nature⁠—any more than they are unfixed when one man alters the opinion of another by throwing a book, proper for that purpose, in his way? I say, how many things may be brought about thus, not only in regard of ourselves, but other people who may be concerned in our actions, either immediately,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-268" id="note-268" epub:type="noteref">268</a> or in time through perhaps many intermediate events? For the prosperity or improsperity of a man, or his fate here, does not entirely depend upon his own prudence or imprudence, but in great measure upon his situation among the rest of mankind, and what they do. The natural effect of his management, meeting with such things as are the natural effects of the actions of other men, and being blended with them, the result may be something not intended or foreseen.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>There possibly may be, and most probably are, beings invisible and superior in nature to us, who may by other means be in many respects ministers of God’s providence, and authors under Him of many events to particular men, without altering the laws of nature. For it implies no contradiction or absurdity to say there are such beings⁠—on the contrary, we have the greatest reason to think what has been intimated already: that such imperfect beings as we are, are far below the top of the scale. The pictures of spiritual beings cannot be drawn in our imagination, as of corporeal, yet to the upper and reasoning part of the mind the idea of spiritual substance may perhaps be as clear as that of corporeity.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-269" id="note-269" epub:type="noteref">269</a> For what penetrability is must be known just as well as what impenetrability is, and so on.</p>
					<p>And since it has been proved (<a href="#p-41">see this part of proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span></a>), that all corporeal motions proceed originally from something incorporeal, it must be as certain that there are incorporeal substances as that there is motion. Besides, how can we tell but that there may be above us beings of greater powers, and more perfect intellects, and capable of mighty things, which yet may have corporeal vehicles as we have, but finer and invisible? Nay, who knows but that there may be even of these many orders, rising in dignity of nature and amplitude of power, one above another? It is no way below the philosophy of these times, which seems to delight in enlarging the capacities of matter, to assert the possibility of this. But, however, my own defects sufficiently convince me that I have no pretension to be one of the first rank, or that which is next under the All-perfect.</p>
					<p>Now then, as we ourselves, by the use of our powers, do many times interpose and alter the course of things within our sphere from what it would be if they were left entirely to the laws of motion and gravitation, without being said to alter those <em>laws</em>; so may these superior beings likewise, in respect of things within their spheres (much larger be sure, the least of them all, than ours is), only with this difference: that as their knowledge is more extensive, their intellects purer, their reason better, they may be much properer instruments of Divine providence with respect to us, than we can be with respect one to another, or to the animals below us. I cannot think indeed that the power of these beings is so large as to alter or suspend the general laws of the world, or that the world is like a bungling piece of clockwork which requires to be oft set backward or forward by them, or that they can at pleasure change their condition to ape us or inferior beings, and consequently am not apt hastily to credit stories of portents, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, such as cannot be true unless the natures of things and their manner of being be quite reversed; yet (I will repeat it again) as men may be so placed as to become, even by the free exercise of their own powers, instruments of God’s particular providence to other men (or animals), so may we well suppose that these higher beings may be so distributed through the universe, and subject to such an economy (though I pretend not to tell what that is), as may render them also instruments of the same providence, and that they may, in proportion to their greater abilities, be capable, consistently with the laws of nature, some way or other, though not in our way, of influencing human affairs in proper places.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Lastly, what I have ventured to lay before you I would not have to be so understood, as if I peremptorily asserted things to be just in this manner, or pretended to impose my thoughts upon anybody else; my design is only to show how I endeavor to help my own narrow conceptions. There must be other ways, above my understanding,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-270" id="note-270" epub:type="noteref">270</a> by which such a Being as God is may take care of private cases without interrupting the order of the universe or putting any of the parts of it out of their channels. We may be sure He regards everything as being what it is, and that therefore His laws must be accommodated to the true genius and capacities of those things which are affected by them. The purely material part of the world is governed by such as are suited to the state of a being which is insensible, passive only, and everywhere and always the same; and these seem to be simple and few, and to carry natural agents into one constant road. But intelligent, active, free beings must be under a government of another form. They must, truth requiring it, be considered as beings who may behave themselves as they ought, or not; as beings susceptive of pleasure and pain; as beings who not only owe to God all that they are or have, but are (or may be) sensible of this, and to whom therefore it must be natural upon many occasions to supplicate Him for mercy, defense, direction, assistance; lastly, as beings whose cases admit great variety: and therefore that <em>influence</em>, by which He is present to them, must be different from that by which gravitation and common phenomena are produced in matter. This seems to be, as it were, a public influence, the other private, answering private cases, and prayers; this to operate directly upon the body, the other more especially upon the mind, and upon the body by it, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> But I forbear, lest I should go too far out of my depth, only adding in general that God cannot put things so far out of His own power, as that He should not forever govern transactions and events in His own world; nor can perfect knowledge and power ever want proper means to achieve what is fit to be done. So that, though what I advanced should stand for nothing, there may still be a particular providence notwithstanding the forementioned difficulty. And then, if there <em>may be</em> one, it will unavoidably follow that there <em>is</em> one: because in the description of providence, <a href="#p-78">see proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span></a>, nothing is supposed with respect to particular cases but that they should be provided for in such a manner as will at last agree best with reason; and to allow that this may be done, and yet say that it is not done, implies a blasphemy that creates horror: it is to charge the Perfect being with one of the greatest imperfections, and to make Him not so much as a <em>reasonable</em> being.</p>
				</li>
			</ol>
			<p>I conclude, then, that it is as certain that there is a particular providence, as that God is a Being of perfect reason. For if men are treated according to reason, they must be treated according to what they are: the virtuous, the just, the compassionate, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, as such, and the vicious, unjust, cruel, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, according to what they are; and their several cases must be taken and considered as they are, which cannot be done without such a providence.</p>
			<p>Against all this, it has been (as one might well expect) objected of old, that things do not seem to be dealt according to reason: virtuous and good men very often laboring under adversity, pains, persecutions, while vicious, wicked, cruel men prevail and flourish.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-271" id="note-271" epub:type="noteref">271</a> But to this an answer (in which I shall a little further explain myself) is ready. It might be taken out of that which has been given to the Manichean objection under <a href="#p-15">proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span></a>. But I shall here give one more direct, and let that and this be mutually assisting and supplements each to the other:</p>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<p>We are not always certain who are good, who wicked.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-272" id="note-272" epub:type="noteref">272</a> If we trust to fame and reports, these may proceed, on the one hand, from partial friendship, or flattery; on the other, from ill-natured surmises and constructions of things, envy, or malice; and on either, from small matters aggrandized, from mistake, or from the unskillful relation even of truth itself. Opposite parties make a merit of blackening their adversaries<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-273" id="note-273" epub:type="noteref">273</a> and brightening their friends, undeservedly and unmeasurably, and to idle companions and gossips it is diversion, and what makes the principal part of their conversation,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-274" id="note-274" epub:type="noteref">274</a> to rehearse the characters of men, dressed up out of their own dreams and inventions. And besides all this, the good or bad repute of men depends in great measure upon mean people, who carry their stories from family to family, and propagate them very fast, like little insects, which lay apace, and the less the faster. There are few, very few, who have the opportunity and the will and the ability to represent things truly.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-275" id="note-275" epub:type="noteref">275</a> Beside the matters of fact themselves, there are many circumstances which, before sentence is passed, ought to be known and weighed, and yet scarce ever can be known, but to the person himself who is concerned. He may have other views, and another sense of things, than his judges have; and what he understands, what he feels, what he intends, may be a secret confined to his own breast. A man may, through bodily indispositions and faults in his constitution which it is not in his power to correct, be subject to starts and inadvertancies, or obnoxious to snares, which he cannot be aware of; or, through want of information or proper helps, he may labor under invincible errors, and act as in the dark: in which cases, he may do things which are in themselves wrong, and yet be innocent, or at least rather to be pitied than censured with severity. Or perhaps the censurer, notwithstanding this kind of men talk as if they were infallible, may be mistaken himself in his opinion, and judge that to be wrong which in truth is right.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-276" id="note-276" epub:type="noteref">276</a> Nothing more common than this. Ignorant and superstitious wretches measure the actions of lettered and philosophical men by the tattle of their nurses or illiterate parents and companions, or by the fashion of the country, and people of differing religions judge and condemn each other by their own tenets, when both of them cannot be in the right, and it is well if <em>either</em> of them are. To which may be added that the true characters of men must chiefly depend upon the unseen part of their lives, since the truest and best religion is most private and the greatest wickedness endeavors to be so.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-277" id="note-277" epub:type="noteref">277</a> Some are modest, and hide their virtues; others hypocritical, and conceal their vices under shows of sanctity, good nature, or something that is specious. So that it is, many times, hard to discern to which of the two sorts, the good or the bad, a man ought to be aggregated.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>It rarely happens that we are competent judges of the good or bad fortune of other people.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-278" id="note-278" epub:type="noteref">278</a> That which is disagreeable to one, is many times agreeable to another, or disagreeable in a less degree. The misery accruing from any infliction or bad circumstance of life is to be computed as in <a href="section-2.xhtml#p-3">section <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></a>, or according to the resistence and capacity of bearing it which it meets with. If one man can carry a weight of four or five hundred pounds as well as another can the weight of one hundred, by these different weights they will be equally loaded. And so the same poverty or disgrace, the same wounds, <abbr>etc.</abbr> do not give the same pain to all men. The apprehension of but a vein to be opened is worse to some, than the apparatus to an execution is to others; and a word may be more terrible and sensible to tender natures, than a sword is to the senseless or intrepid breed. The same may be said with respect to enjoyments: men have different tastes, and the use of the same things does not beget equal pleasure in all. Besides, we scarce ever know the whole case. We do not see the inward stings and secret pains which many of those men carry about them, whose external splendor and flourishing estate is so much admired by beholders,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-279" id="note-279" epub:type="noteref">279</a> nor perhaps sufficiently consider the silent pleasures of a lower fortune, arising from temperance, moderate desires, easy reflections, a consciousness of knowledge and truth, with other pleasures of the mind, much greater many times than those of the body.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-280" id="note-280" epub:type="noteref">280</a> Before one can pronounce another happy or otherwise, he should know all the other’s enjoyments and all his sufferings.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-281" id="note-281" epub:type="noteref">281</a> Many misfortunes are compensated<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-282" id="note-282" epub:type="noteref">282</a> by some larger endowments, or extraordinary felicities in other respects. But suppose the pleasures of some, and the sufferings of some others, to be just as they appear: still we know not the consequences of them.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-283" id="note-283" epub:type="noteref">283</a> The pleasures of those men may lead to miseries greater than those of the latter, and be in reality the greater misfortune; and, again, the sufferings of these may be preludes to succeeding advantages.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-284" id="note-284" epub:type="noteref">284</a> So that, indeed, we know not how to name these outward appearances of particular men, nor which to call happiness, which the contrary, unless we knew the inward sense of the persons themselves, all their true circumstances, and what will be hereafter consequent upon their present success or adversity.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Men ought to be considered as members of families, nations, mankind, the universe, from which they cannot be separated; and then from the very condition of their being it will appear that there must be great inequalities:<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-285" id="note-285" epub:type="noteref">285</a> that the innocent cannot but be sometimes involved in general calamities or punishments, nor the guilty but share in public prosperities,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-286" id="note-286" epub:type="noteref">286</a> and that the good of the whole society or kind is to be regarded preferably to the present pleasure of any individual, if they happen to clash.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-287" id="note-287" epub:type="noteref">287</a></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Lastly, if the virtuous man has undergone more, in this life, than it would be reasonable he should suffer, if there was no other, yet those sufferings may not be unreasonable if there <em>is</em> another. For they may be made up to him by such enjoyments as it would be reasonable for him to prefer, even with those previous mortifications, before the pleasures of this life with the loss of them. And moreover, sometimes the only way to the felicities of a better state may lie through dark and difficult passes, discipline to some men being necessary to bring them to reflect, and to force them into such methods as may produce in them proper improvements, such as otherwise and of themselves they would never have fallen into. On the other side, if vicious and wicked men do prosper and make a figure, yet it is possible their sufferings hereafter may be such as that the excess of them above their past enjoyments may be equal to the just mulct of their villanies and wickedness. And further, their worldly pleasures (which must be supposed to be such as are not philosophical, or moderated and governed by reason and habits of virtue) being apt to fill the mind, and engross the whole man, and by that means to exclude almost all right reflections, with the proper applications of them, may be the very causes of their ruin, while they leave them under such defects at the end of their days, as we shall see afterward tend to unhappiness.</p>
				</li>
			</ol>
			<p>If what is objected be in many instances true, this only infers the <em>necessity</em> of a future state: that is, if good and bad men are not respectively treated according to reason in <em>this life</em>, they may yet be so treated if this and another to follow be taken together into the account.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-288" id="note-288" epub:type="noteref">288</a> And perhaps it is (as I have been always apt to think) in order to convince us of the certainty of a future state, that instances of that kind have been so numerous. For he must not only be guilty of blasphemy, but reduced to the greatest absurdity, who, rather than he will own there is such a state, is forced to make God an unreasonable Being:<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-289" id="note-289" epub:type="noteref">289</a> which I think amounts to a strong demonstration that there is one. But of that, more hereafter.</p>
			<p><b><span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span>. If we would behave ourselves as being what we cannot but be sensible we are, towards God as being what He is according to the foregoing propositions;</b> or, <b>if we would endeavor to behave ourselves towards him according to truth, we must observe these following and the like particulars:</b></p>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<p>We must not pretend to represent Him by any picture or image whatsoever.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-290" id="note-290" epub:type="noteref">290</a> Because this is flatly to deny his incorporeity, incomprehensible nature, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr><a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-291" id="note-291" epub:type="noteref">291</a></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>We ought to be so far from doing this, that even the language we use when we speak of Him, and especially of his positive nature and essential properties, ought not only to be chosen with the utmost care, but also to be understood in the sublimest sense; and the same is true with respect to our thoughts, <i xml:lang="la">mutatis mutandis</i>.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-292" id="note-292" epub:type="noteref">292</a> Or, thus: we must endeavor to think and speak of Him in the most reverent terms and most proper manner we are able;<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-293" id="note-293" epub:type="noteref">293</a> keeping withal this general conclusion and, as it were, habitual reflection in our minds: that, though we do the best we can, He is still something above all our conceptions; and desiring that our faint expressions may be taken as aiming at a higher and more proportionable meaning. To do otherwise implies not only that His mode of existence and essential attributes are comprehensible by us, but also (which is more) that our words and phrases, taken from among ourselves<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-294" id="note-294" epub:type="noteref">294</a> and the objects of our faculties, are adequate expressions of them: contrary to truth.</p>
					<p>To explain myself by a few instances: When we ascribe <em>mercy</em> to God, or implore His <em>mercy</em>, it must not be understood to be mercy like that which is called “compassion” in us. For though this be a very distinguishing affection in human nature,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-295" id="note-295" epub:type="noteref">295</a> to which we are made subject for good reasons⁠—the constitution of the world and circumstances of our present state making it necessary for us to compassionate each the sufferings of another⁠—yet it is accompanied with uneasiness, and must therefore not be ascribed strictly to God in that sense in which it is used when ascribed to ourselves. It perhaps may not be amiss to call it “Divine mercy,” or the like, to distinguish it, and to show that we mean something, which, though in our low way of speaking and by way of analogy we call it by the same name, is yet in the perfect nature of God very different. Or we may consider it in general as the manner in which God respects poor supplicants and proper objects for their good. For certainly the respect or relation which lies between God, considered as an unchangeable Being, and one that is humble and supplicates and endeavors to qualify himself for mercy, cannot be the same with that which lies between the same unchangeable God and one that is obstinate, and will not supplicate or endeavor to qualify himself:<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-296" id="note-296" epub:type="noteref">296</a> that is, the same thing, or Being, cannot respect opposite and contradictory characters in the same manner: him who does behave himself as before, and him who does not. Therefore, when we apply to the mercy of God, and beg of him to pity our infirmities and wants, the design is not to move His affections⁠—as good speakers move their auditors by the pathetic arts of rhetoric, or hearty beggars theirs by importunities and tears⁠—but to express our own sense of ourselves and circumstances in such a manner as may render us more capable of the emanations of Divine goodness, and fit to receive such instances of His beneficience as to us may seem to be the effects of compassion, though they proceed not from any alteration in the Deity. For it may be, and no doubt is, agreeable to perfect reason always and without alteration, that he who labors under a sense of his own defects, honestly uses his best endeavors to mend what is amiss, and (among other things) flies for relief to Him upon whom his being and all that he has do depend, should have many things granted him which are not given to the careless, obdurate, unasking<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-297" id="note-297" epub:type="noteref">297</a> part of mankind; though his expressions and manner of address, with all his care, are still inadequate, and below the Divine nature. In short, by our applications, we cannot pretend to produce any alteration in the Deity, but by an alteration in ourselves, we may alter the relation or respect lying between him and us.</p>
					<p>As God is a pure, uncompounded Being, His attributes of mercy, justice, <abbr>etc.</abbr> cannot be as we conceive them, because in him they are one. Perhaps they may more properly be called together “Divine reason,” which, as it exerts itself upon this or that occasion, is by us variously denominated.</p>
					<p>Here it must not be forgot that “mercy” or “mercies” are many times taken for advantages or benefits enjoyed by us, and then they are properly ascribed to God, from whom they proceed as the effects of His beneficience and providence.</p>
					<p>When we speak of the knowledge of God, we must not mean that He knows things in the way that we do, that any intention or operation of His mind is requisite to produce it: that He apprehends things by any impressions made upon Him, that He reasons by the help of ideas, or even that the knowledge which in us is most intuitive and immediate does in any degree come up to the mode in which He knows things. We must rather intend, in general, that there is nothing of which He is, or can be, ignorant, which has been said already and is, I am afraid, as much as we can safely say.</p>
					<p>When <em>glory</em>, <em>honor</em>, <em>praise</em><a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-298" id="note-298" epub:type="noteref">298</a> are given to God, or He is said to do anything for His own glory, or we to propose the glory of His name in what we do, those words should not be taken as standing for that kind of glory and applause which is so industriously sought, and capriciously<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-299" id="note-299" epub:type="noteref">299</a> distributed, among us mortals, and which I will take this opportunity to handle a little more largely, in order to give here a specimen of the world and save that trouble in another place. Among us, some are celebrated for small matters, either through the ignorance of the multitude, the partiality of a faction, the advantage of great friendships, the usual deference paid to men in eminent stations, or mere good luck;<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-300" id="note-300" epub:type="noteref">300</a> and others for achieving such things as, if they were duly weighed, and people were not imposed upon by false notions—first introduced in barbarous times, and since polished and brought into fashion by historians, poets, and flatterers—would appear rather to be a disgrace to savages than any recommendation of rational and civilized natures. Strength, and courage, and beauty, and parts, and birth are followed with encomiums and honors, which, though they may be the felicities and privileges of the possessors, cannot be their merit, who received them gratis, and contributed nothing<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-301" id="note-301" epub:type="noteref">301</a> themselves toward the acquisition of them; while real virtue and industry (which, even when unsuccessful, or oppressed by ill health or unkind fortune, give the truest title to praise) lie disregarded. Thirst after glory, when that is desired merely for its own sake, is founded in ambition and vanity;<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-302" id="note-302" epub:type="noteref">302</a> the thing itself is but a dream and imagination; since, according to the differing humors and sentiments of nations and ages, the same thing may be either glorious or inglorious, the effect of it, considered still by itself, is neither more health, nor estate, nor knowledge, nor virtue to him who has it, or, if that be anything, it is but what must cease when the man<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-303" id="note-303" epub:type="noteref">303</a> dies, and, after all, as it lives but in the breath of the people, a little sly envy or a new turn of things extinguishes it,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-304" id="note-304" epub:type="noteref">304</a> or perhaps it goes quite out of itself.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-305" id="note-305" epub:type="noteref">305</a> Men please themselves with notions of immortality, and fancy a perpetuity of fame secured to themselves by books and testimonies of historians; but, alas! it is a stupid delusion when they imagine themselves present, and enjoying that fame at the reading of their story after their death. And besides, in reality the man is not known ever the more to posterity, because his name is transmitted to them: <em>he</em> does not live because his <em>name</em> does. When it is said Julius Cæsar subdued Gaul, beat Pompey, changed the Roman commonwealth into a monarchy, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, it is the same thing as to say, the conqueror of Pompey, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, was Cæsar: that is, Cæsar and the conqueror of Pompey are the same thing; and Cæsar is as much known by the one designation as by the other. The amount then is only this: that the conqueror of Pompey conquered Pompey; or somebody conquered Pompey; or rather, since Pompey is as little known now as Cæsar, somebody conquered somebody.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-306" id="note-306" epub:type="noteref">306</a> Such a poor business is this boasted immortality,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-307" id="note-307" epub:type="noteref">307</a> and such as has been here described is the thing called “glory” among us! The notion of it may serve to excite them who, having abilities to serve their country in time of real danger or want, or to do some other good, have yet not philosophy enough to do this upon principles of virtue, or to see through the glories of the world (just as we excite children by praising them, and as we see many good inventions and improvements proceed from emulation and vanity); but to discerning men this fame is mere air, and the next remove from nothing:<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-308" id="note-308" epub:type="noteref">308</a> what they despise, if not shun. I think there are two considerations which may justify a desire of some glory or honor, and scarce more. When men have performed any virtuous actions, or such as sit easy upon their memories, it is a reasonable pleasure to have the testimony of the world added to that of their own consciences, that they have done well:<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-309" id="note-309" epub:type="noteref">309</a> and more than that, if the reputation acquired by any qualification or action may produce a man any real comfort or advantage (if it be only protection from the insolencies and injustice of mankind, or if it enables him to do by his authority more good to others), to have this privilege must be a great satisfaction, and what a wise and good man may be allowed, as he has opportunity, to propose to himself. But then he proposes it no farther than it may be useful; and it can be no farther useful than he wants it. So that upon the whole, glory, praise, and the like, are either mere vanity, or only valuable in proportion to our defects and wants. If then those words are understood according to the import and value they have among men, how dares anyone think that the Supreme being can propose such a mean end to himself as our praises? He can neither want nor value them. Alexander, according to his taste of things, it may well be supposed would have been proud to have heard that he should be the subject of some second Homer,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-310" id="note-310" epub:type="noteref">310</a> in whose sheets his name might be embalmed for ages to come, or to have been celebrated at Athens, the mother of so many wits and captains—but sure even he, with all his vanity, could not propose to himself as the end of all his fatigues and dangers only to be praised by children, or rather by worms and insects, if they were capable of showing some faint sense of his greatness.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-311" id="note-311" epub:type="noteref">311</a> And yet how far short is this comparison! In conclusion therefore, though men have been accustomed to speak of the Deity in terms taken from princes, and such things as they have, in their weakness, admired; though these are now incorporated into the language of Divines; and though, considering what defects there are in our ways of thinking and speaking, we cannot well part with them all; yet we must remember to <em>exalt</em> the sense of them, or annex some mental qualification to the use of them. As, if God be said to do things for His own glory, the meaning I humbly conceive must be that the transcendent excellence of His nature may be collected from the form of the world and administration of things in it, where there occur such marks of inexpressible wisdom and power that He needed not to have given us greater, had He only intended His own glory: or something to this purpose. Or, if the glory of what <em>we</em> do be ascribed to Him, by this must be signified that no glory is due to us, who have no powers but what originally depend upon Him, and that we desire therefore to acknowledge Him to be the true author of all that which is laudable in us.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-312" id="note-312" epub:type="noteref">312</a></p>
					<p>When we <em>thank</em> God for any deliverance or enjoyment, this must not be so understood as if He could value Himself upon our ceremonious acknowledgments, or wanted complements or any return from us. It is rather a profession of the sense we have of our wants and defects, of the beneficience of His nature, and the greatness or reasonableness of the mercies received: an effort of a poor dependent being who desires to own things, as far as he is able, to be what they are,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-313" id="note-313" epub:type="noteref">313</a> and especially to beget in himself such a disposition of mind as he ought to have towards his Almighty benefactor.</p>
					<p>When we are said to be <em>servants</em> of God, or to <em>serve</em> Him, or do Him <em>service</em>, these phrases are not to be taken as when one man is said to be servant of another, or to do him service. For here it implies the doing of something which is useful and beneficial to the man who is served, and what he wants, or fancies he wants: but nothing of <em>want</em> can be supposed in God, nor can we any way be profitable or serviceable to Him. To serve Him, therefore, must rather be to worship or adore Him (of which something by and by). And thus that word in another language, of which our serve is but the translation, is frequently used: as “to serve a graven image”<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-314" id="note-314" epub:type="noteref">314</a> is to worship the image, but cannot signify the doing of anything which may be serviceable or useful to the dead stone. Or “to serve God” may be understood in a sense something like that: “Serve the king of Babylon.”<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-315" id="note-315" epub:type="noteref">315</a> For they were said to serve the king of Babylon, who owned his authority and lived according to his laws, though they did nothing, nor had anything perhaps, which could be particularly serviceable to him; and so they may be said to serve God, or to be His servants, who live in a continual sense of His sovereign nature and power over them, and endeavor to conform themselves to the laws which He has imposed upon them.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-316" id="note-316" epub:type="noteref">316</a> In these senses we pray, that we may live to serve Him: that is, we pray, that we may live to worship Him, and practice those laws of reason and virtue to which rational natures are by Him subjected.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-317" id="note-317" epub:type="noteref">317</a></p>
					<p>Many more reflections might be made upon epithets and ways of speaking introduced by custom, from rude antiquity, or by necessity following from the narrowness either of men’s minds or their language. It is plain that “love,” “anger,” “hands,” “eyes,” <abbr>etc.</abbr> when ascribed to God, cannot import such bodily parts or passions as are found in us. Even the pronouns, “my,” “thy,” “his” (as His people, His house, <abbr>etc.</abbr>) require much temper in the use of them.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-318" id="note-318" epub:type="noteref">318</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="li-19">
					<p>We shall find ourselves bound to worship Him, in the best manner we can. For by worshipping Him I mean nothing but owning Him to be what He is, and ourselves to be what we are, by some more solemn and proper act: that is, by addressing ourselves as His dependents to Him as the Supreme cause and Governor of the world, with acknowledgments of what we enjoy, petitions for what we really want, or He knows to be convenient for us,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-319" id="note-319" epub:type="noteref">319</a> and the like. As if, <abbr class="initialism">e.g.</abbr> I should in some humble and composed manner<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-320" id="note-320" epub:type="noteref">320</a> pray to that “Almighty being, upon whom depends the existence of the world, and by whose providence I have been preserved to this moment and enjoyed many undeserved advantages, that He would graciously accept my grateful sense and acknowledgments of all His beneficience toward me; that he would deliver me from the evil consequences of all my transgressions and follies; that He would endow me with such dispositions and powers as may carry me innocently and safely through all future trials, and may enable me upon all occasions to behave myself conformably to the laws of reason, piously, and wisely; that He would suffer no being to injure me, no misfortune to befall me, nor me to hurt myself by any error or misconduct of my own; that He would vouchsafe me clear and distinct perceptions of things, with so much health and prosperity as may be good for me; that I may at least pass my time in peace, with contentment, and tranquility of mind; and that, having faithfully discharged my duty to my family and friends, and endeavored to improve myself in virtuous habits and useful knowledge, I may at last make a decent and happy exit, and then find myself in some better state.” Not to do this, or something like it, will certainly fall among those criminal omissions mentioned in <a href="section-1.xhtml#p-19">section <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, proposition <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span></a>. For never to acknowledge the enjoyments and privileges we have received and hold of God, is in effect to deny that we receive them from Him; not to apply to Him for what we want is to deny either our wants, or His power of helping us; and so on: all contrary to truth.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-321" id="note-321" epub:type="noteref">321</a></p>
					<p>It must ever be owned, that no worship can be proportionable to the Divine nature and perfections; but yet, that we are obliged to do what we can: therefore I added those words, “in the best manner we can.” And it must be acknowledged further, that those words do not oblige us to be <em>always</em> at our devotions neither.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-322" id="note-322" epub:type="noteref">322</a> For as in the worship of God we own Him to be what He is, so must we do this as not denying ourselves to be what we are: beings not capable of bearing continual intention of mind; beings that are encompassed with many wants, which by the constitution of our nature require to be supplied, not without care and activity joined to our prayers; beings that are made for many harmless enjoyments; beings that have many offices to perform one for another; and beings in whom, all things considered, it would be less respect to be constantly in the formal act of devotion, than it is to address ourselves to Him with prepared minds, at certain times, or upon certain occasions. To be always thus engaged, if it could be, would be to make God what He is not: since it seems to suppose that He wants it and we merit Him by it; or that He is bound to give what we ask, without our endeavoring; or, at least, that He is a Being obnoxious to importunity and teasing. For these reasons I have also in the explication of my meaning inserted that limitation, “by some solemn and proper act.”</p>
					<p>Though every man knows best his own opportunities and circumstances, and therefore may be most able to judge for himself how he may best perform this duty, yet in general it may be said that, to the doing of it solemnly and in the best manner we can, these things are required: an intent mind,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-323" id="note-323" epub:type="noteref">323</a> proper times and places, a proper form of words, and a proper posture. For if the mind be absent, or attends not to what is said, it is not the man that prays: this is only as it were the noise of a machine, which is put into motion indeed, but without any consciousness of its own act. To repeat one’s prayers with moving lips, but alienated thoughts, is not to pray in the best manner we can, because it is not in a manner agreeable to what we are, or to truth. For this is to do it only as <em>speaking</em>, and not as <em>thinking</em> beings.</p>
					<p>Upon this account, it will be certain that all times and places cannot be equally proper.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-324" id="note-324" epub:type="noteref">324</a> Some times are engrossed by the business of life, and some places lie exposed to interruptions. Those of retreat and silence ought to be sought, and, as far as fairly it may be, contrived. And for this further reason: because the farther we are removed from the notice of others, the clearer we stand of all ostentation; that is, the more we do it upon the score of truth and duty; and this is, again, the more truly and dutifully we do it.</p>
					<p>Our next care is a proper form of words. All prayer must either be vocal or mental. Now even that which is called mental can scarce be made without words,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-325" id="note-325" epub:type="noteref">325</a> or something equivalent.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-326" id="note-326" epub:type="noteref">326</a> (I believe that even the deaf and dumb form to themselves some kind of language: I mean something which supplies the room of language.) For thoughts in their naked state, divested of all words and taken merely by themselves, are such subtle and fleeting things as are scarce capable of making any appearance in the mind; at least of being detained, compared together, and arranged into sentences. If a sentence may be so made up of sensible ideas as to subsist in the mind by the help of those images which remain in the fantasy, after the manner of a sentence expressed in pictures or by hieroglyphics, yet such a sentence must be very imperfect⁠—through the want of grammatical inflections, particles, and other additions necessary to modify and connect the ideas, of which (particles, <abbr>etc.</abbr>) there can be no images<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-327" id="note-327" epub:type="noteref">327</a>⁠—and indeed little more than a set of disjointed conceptions, scarce exhibiting any sense without the assistance of language to fill up the blanks; and besides that, a prayer cannot be made out of such sentences as those. It is by the help of words, at least in great measure, that we even reason and discourse within ourselves, as well as communicate our thoughts and discourse with others; and if anyone observes himself well, he will find that he thinks, as well as speaks, in some language, and that in thinking he supposes and runs over silently and habitually those sounds which in speaking he actually makes. This is the cause why men can scarce write well in any language but their own: for while they think in their own, their style and speech, which is but the portraiture of their thoughts, must have the turn and genius of their own language, to what language soever the particular words belong. In short, words seem to be, as it were, bodies or vehicles to the sense or meaning, which is the spiritual part,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-328" id="note-328" epub:type="noteref">328</a> and which without the other can hardly be fixed in the mind. Let any man try ingenuously, whether he can think over but that short prayer in Plato, <i xml:lang="la">Τὰ μὲν ἐθλὰ, <abbr class="initialism">κτλ.</abbr></i>,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-329" id="note-329" epub:type="noteref">329</a> abstracted quite from those and all other words. One may apply his mind to the words of a prayer pronounced by another, and by taking them in make them his own; or he may be, as it were, his own reader, and pronounce them himself; or he may lay before him a prayer in writing, and so carry his eyes and his mind together through it; or he may go over a form of words imprinted on his memory; or he may put words together in his mind <i xml:lang="la">ex tempore</i>: but still, in all these ways, words and language are used. And since to think over a set of words cannot be a more adequate manner of addressing to God (who neither speaks, nor thinks like us) than to speak it over and think too; and moreover, since the very sound of the words affects us, and, when the form is ready prepared, and the mind freed from the labor of composing, does really help attention:<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-330" id="note-330" epub:type="noteref">330</a> I say, since this is the case, it must be better, when we have opportunity, to pronounce a prayer,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-331" id="note-331" epub:type="noteref">331</a> than only to think it over. But then it should be spoken no louder (I mean when we pray privately) than just to make it audible to ourselves.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-332" id="note-332" epub:type="noteref">332</a> It is not upon God’s account that we speak, since he would know even our thoughts: but it is upon our own account, and to make our adoration, though imperfect at the best, as complete as we are able. (Which, by the way, is an answer to them who object, against prayer, the impertinence of talking to God.) This being premised, and it being found that we must make use of words, it cannot be denied that we ought to use the best and properest we can. This cannot be done in extemporaneous effusions, and therefore there must be forms premeditated: the best that we are capable of making or procuring, if we would worship God to the best of our capacity. As a prayer ought to have all the marks of seriousness and being in earnest, it ought to be the plainest, and at the same time is perhaps the hardest of all compositions. It ought to take in a general view of what we have enjoyed, what we want, what we have done, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and everything ought to be expressed with method, in phrases that are grave and pointing, and with such a true eloquence as engages all our attention and represents our deepest sense, without affectation or needless repetitions. These considerations have caused me many times to wonder at those men who dispute against preconceived forms of prayer. They, who talk so much of the spirit of prayer, seem to know but little of it.</p>
					<p>As to the posture, that is best which best expresses our humility, reverence,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-333" id="note-333" epub:type="noteref">333</a> and earnestness, and affects us most. Though perhaps some regard is to be paid to the customs of the place where we are, or of our own country to which we have been most used. Several nations may denote the same thing by different gestures, and we may take these as we do their words: <abbr class="initialism">i.e.</abbr> as having that signification which they put upon them.</p>
					<p>Though I have not hitherto mentioned it, there ought to be also a <em>public worship</em> of the Deity. For a man may be considered as a member of a society, and <em>as such</em> he ought to worship God (if he has the opportunity of doing it: if there are proper prayers used publicly which he may resort to, and his health, <abbr>etc.</abbr> permit). Or the society may be considered as one body that has common interests and concerns, and as such is obliged to worship the Deity, and offer one common prayer. Besides, there are many who know not of themselves how to pray; perhaps cannot so much as read. These, too, must be taken as they are, and consequently some time and place appointed where they may have suitable prayers read to them, and be guided in their devotions. And further, toward the keeping mankind in order, it is necessary there should be some religion professed, and even established; which cannot be without some public worship. And were it not for that sense of virtue, which is principally preserved (so far as it is preserved) by national forms and habits of religion, men would soon lose it all, run wild, prey upon one another, and do what else the worst of savages do.</p>
					<p>But how does this public worship, it may be demanded, comport with that retreat and privacy recommended above? Answer: I spoke there of prayer <em>in general</em>, to which those circumstances give a great advantage; but then they are recommended no farther than they can be had and the nature of the prayer admits of them. Excuse a short reflection here, which if it be not directly for the purpose, is not altogether foreign to it: Though he who reads the form of public prayer reads it to all at the same time, that all may unite in one common act which otherwise they could not do, yet still, every particular person who minds the prayers at all has a separate perception of the words in his mind, and there he offers them, or the sense contained under them, with more or less application and ardor. And since no man can be said to pray any further than he does this, and it cannot be known to anybody in the congregation besides himself how far he does do it, his prayer is in reality as private as if he was enclosed within a thousand walls. So that, though there are reasons for a public worship, yet I will venture to affirm that all true prayer is private; and the true seat of it being in the mind, toward the interesting of whose powers all the circumstances of worship are mainiy designed to contribute, it may be said upon that account to be always made in the most retired and undiscerned of all retreats;<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-334" id="note-334" epub:type="noteref">334</a> nor can more be said in respect of a worship which, by the terms, is in other respects public. A man may be present in a congregation, and either pray the same prayer in which others seem to join, or some other, or none at all,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-335" id="note-335" epub:type="noteref">335</a> for ought anybody there can tell besides himself.</p>
					<p>I am not insensible how much I may expose myself by these things to the laughter of some who are utter strangers to all this language. What a stir is here, say they, about <em>praying</em>? Who ever observed that they who pray are more successful or happy than they are who do not? Answer: All observations of this kind must be very lubricous and uncertain. We neither know what other men are inwardly and really,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-336" id="note-336" epub:type="noteref">336</a> nor how they pray,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-337" id="note-337" epub:type="noteref">337</a> nor what to call success.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-338" id="note-338" epub:type="noteref">338</a> That which is good for one, may be bad for another; and that which seems good at present, may at length be evil, or introduce something which is so.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-339" id="note-339" epub:type="noteref">339</a> And as to the prosperity of them who endeavor to worship God in a proper and reasonable manner, whatever it is, perhaps it might be less if they did not, or their misfortunes might be greater; who can be certain of the contrary? If these gentlemen have any way of discovering it, I wish they would impart their secret. In the meantime, sure they cannot expect that, even in the most imperfect sketch of natural religion, the worship of the Deity should be omitted: that very thing which has been principally intended by the word “religion.”<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-340" id="note-340" epub:type="noteref">340</a></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>And lastly, to deliver what remains, summarily: Rational beings, or they to whom reason is the great law of their nature, if they would behave themselves as above, should consider in earnest what a mighty being He is, who by the constitution of their nature has laid them under an obligation of being governed by it, and whose laws the dictates of right reason may be said to be. They ought to keep it well impressed upon their minds that He is the being upon whom their very existence depends; that it is He who superintends and administers the affairs of the world by His providence; that the effects of His power and influence are visible before their faces, and round about them, in all the phenomena of nature, not one of which could be without Him; that they are always in His presence; that He is a being of perfect reason; that, if it be reasonable that the transgressors of reason should be punished, they will most certainly, one time or other, be punished, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> And then, if they do this, it is easy to see what effect it must have upon their thoughts, words,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-341" id="note-341" epub:type="noteref">341</a> and actions.</p>
				</li>
			</ol>
			<p>By what is said here, no superstition is intended to be introduced; it is only the practice of reason and truth which is required, and anything that is not inconsistent with them may be freely done, though under the inspection of our great Lawgiver himself.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
